Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion People
H. Charles J. Godfray, 1* John R. Beddington, 2 Ian R. Crute, 3 Lawrence Haddad, 4 David Lawrence, 5 James
F. Muir, 6 Jules Pretty, 7 Sherman Robinson, 8 Sandy M. Thomas, 9 Camilla Toulmin10
1Department of Zoology and Institute of Biodiversity at the James Martin 21st Century School, University of Oxford, South
Parks Rd., Oxford, OX1 3PS, UK. 2U.K. Government Office for Science, 1 Victoria Street, London SW1H OET, UK.
3Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board, Stoneleigh Park, Kenilworth, Warwickshire, CV8 2TL, UK. 4Institute of
Development Studies, University of Sussex, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9RE, UK. 5Syngenta AG, P.O. Box,
CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. 6Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, Stirlingshire, FK9 4LA, UK.
7Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester, Essex, CO4 3SQ, UK. 8Institute of
Development Studies, University of Sussex, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9RE, UK. 9Foresight, U.K.
Government Office for Science, 1 Victoria Street, London SW1H OET, UK. 10International Institute for Environment and
Development, 3 Endsleigh Street, London, WC1H 0DD, UK.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: charles.godfray@zoo.ox.ac.uk
Continuing population and consumption growth will mitigation and adaptation measures may affect the food
mean that the global demand for food will increase for at system (7, 8).
least another forty years. Growing competition for land, A three-fold challenge now faces the world (9): Match the
water and energy, and the over-exploitation of fisheries, rapidly changing demand for food from a larger and more
will affect our ability to produce food, as will the urgent affluent population to its supply; do so in ways that are
requirement to reduce the impact of the food system on environmentally and socially sustainable; and ensure that the
the environment. The effects of climate change are a world’s poorest people are no longer hungry. This challenge
further threat. But the world can produce more food, and requires changes in the way food is produced, stored,
can ensure that it is used more efficiently and equitably. A processed, distributed and accessed that are as radical as those
multifaceted and linked global strategy is needed to that occurred during the 18th-19th century industrial and
ensure sustainable and equitable food security, different agricultural revolutions and the 20th century Green
components of which are explored here. Revolution. Increases in production will have an important
part to play, but they will be constrained as never before by
The past half century has seen remarkable growth in food
the finite resources provided by the earth’s lands, oceans and
production allowing a dramatic decrease in the proportion of
atmosphere (10).
the world’s people that are hungry despite a doubling of the
Patterns in global food prices are indicators of trends in the
total population (Fig. 1) (1, 2). Nevertheless, more than one in
availability of food, at least to those who can afford it and
seven people today still do not have access to sufficient
have access to world markets. Over the past century gross
protein and energy from their diet and even more suffer some
food prices have generally fallen, levelling off in the last
form of micronutrient malnourishment (3). The world is now
three decades, but punctuated by price spikes such as that
facing a new set of intersecting challenges (4). The global
caused by the 1970s oil crisis. In mid-2008 there was an
population will continue to grow, yet is likely to plateau at
unexpected rapid rise in food prices, its causes still debated,
some 9 billion by about the middle of this century. A major
that subsided when the world economy went into recession
correlate of this deceleration in population growth is
(11). However many (but not all) commentators have
increased wealth, and with higher purchasing power comes
predicted that this spike heralds a period of rising and more
higher consumption and a greater demand for processed food,
volatile food prices driven primarily by increased demand
meat, dairy and fish, all of which adds pressure to the food
from rapidly developing countries as well as competition for
supply system. At the same time, food producers are
resources from first-generation biofuels production (12).
experiencing greater competition for land, water and energy,
Increased food prices will stimulate greater investment in
and the need to curb the many negative effects of food
food production, but the critical importance of food to human
production on the environment is increasingly becoming clear
well-being and also to social and political stability makes it
(5, 6). Overarching all these issues is the threat of the effects
likely that governments and other organizations will want to
of substantial climate change, and concerns about how
encourage food production beyond that driven by simple
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 1 / 10.1126/science.1185383
market mechanisms (13). The long term nature of returns on increased approximately twofold (in China by a factor of
investment for many aspects of food production, as well as nearly 3.5), in Latin America by 1.6-fold, while in Africa per
the importance of policies that promote sustainability and capita production fell back from the mid-1970s and has only
equity, also argue against purely relying on market solutions. just reached the same level as in 1961 (2, 20). Substantially
So how can more food be produced sustainably? In the more food—as well as the income to purchase food—could
past, the primary solution to food shortages has been to bring be produced with current crops and livestock if ways were
more land into agriculture and to exploit new fish stocks. Yet found to close the yield gaps.
over the last five decades, while grain production has more Low yields occur because of technical constraints that
than doubled, the amount of land devoted to arable prevent local food producers from increasing productivity, or
agriculture globally has increased by only about 9% (14). for economic reasons arising from market conditions.
Some new land could be brought into cultivation but the Farmers, for example, may not have access to the technical
competition for land from other human activities makes this knowledge and skills required to increase production, to the
an increasingly unlikely or costly solution, particularly if finances required to invest in higher production (e.g.,
protecting biodiversity and the public goods provided by irrigation, fertilizer, machinery, crop-protection products, soil
natural ecosystems (for example carbon storage in rainforest) conservation measures), or to the crop and livestock varieties
are given higher priority (15). Formerly productive that maximise yields. After harvest or slaughter, they may not
agricultural land has in recent decades been lost to be able to store the produce or have access to the
urbanization and other human uses, as well as to infrastructure to transport the produce to consumer markets.
desertification, salinization, soil erosion and other Farmers may also choose not to invest in improving
consequences of unsustainable land management (16). agricultural productivity because the returns do not compare
Further losses, which may be exacerbated by climate change, well with other uses of capital and labour.
are likely (7). Recent policy decisions to produce first- Exactly how best to facilitate increased food production is
generation biofuels on good quality agricultural land have highly site specific. In the most extreme cases of failed states
added to the competitive pressures (17). Thus the most likely and non-functioning markets, the solution lies completely
scenario is that more food will need to be produced from the outside the food system. Where a functioning state exists,
same or less land. Moreover, there are no major new fishing there is a balance to be struck between investing in overall
grounds: virtually all capture fisheries are fully exploited and economic growth as a spur to agriculture and focusing on
most are overexploited. investing in agriculture as a spur to economic growth, though
Recent studies suggest that the world will need 70 to 100% the two are obviously linked in regions such as sub-Saharan
more food by 2050 (1, 18). In this article major strategies for Africa where agriculture typically makes up 20 to 40% GDP.
contributing to the challenge of feeding nine billion people In some situations such as low-income food-importing
including the most disadvantaged are explored. Particular countries investing purely in generating widespread income
emphasis is given to sustainability, as well as to the combined growth to allow food purchases from regions and countries
role of the natural and social sciences in analysing and with better production capabilities may be the best choice.
addressing the challenge. When investment is targeted at food production, a further
issue is the balance between putting resources into regional
Closing the Yield Gap
and national infrastructure such as roads and ports, and
There is wide geographic variation in crop and livestock
investment in local social and economic capital (21, 22).
productivity, even across regions that experience similar
A yield gap may also exist because the high costs of inputs
climates. The difference between realized productivity and
or the low returns from increased production make it
the best that can be achieved using current genetic material
economically suboptimal to raise production to the maximum
and available technologies and management is termed the
technically attainable. Poor transport and market
yield gap. The best yields that can be obtained locally depend
infrastructure raise the prices of inputs such as fertilisers and
on the capacity of farmers to access and use, among other
water, and increase the costs of moving the food produced
things, seeds, water, nutrients, pest management, soils,
into national or world markets. Where the risks of investment
biodiversity, and knowledge. It has been estimated that in
are high, and the means to offset them are absent, not
those parts of south-east Asia where irrigation is available,
investing can be the most rationale decision, part of the
average maximum climate-adjusted rice yields are 8.5 t ha–1,
“poverty trap.” Food production in developing countries can
yet the average actually achieved yields are 60% of this figure
be severely affected by market interventions in the developed
(19). Similar yield gaps are found in rain-fed wheat in central
world such as subsidies or price supports. These need to be
Asia and rain-fed cereals in Argentina and Brazil. Another
carefully designed and implemented so that their effects on
way to illustrate the yield gap is to compare changes in per
capita food production over the last 50 years. In Asia this has
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 2 / 10.1126/science.1185383
global commodity prices do not act as disincentives to production. Food production has important negative
production in other countries (23). “externalities,” namely effects on the environment or
The globalization of the food system offers some local economy that are not reflected in the cost of food. These
food producers access to larger markets as well as to capital include the release of greenhouse gases [especially methane
for investment. At the aggregate level it also appears to and nitrous oxide which are more damaging than CO and for
2
increase the global efficiency of food production by allowing which agriculture is a major source (26)]; environmental
regional specialization in the production of the locally most pollution due to nutrient run-off; water shortages due to over-
appropriate foods. Because the expansion of food production extraction; soil degradation and the loss of biodiversity
and the growth of population both occur at different rates in through land conversion or inappropriate management; and
different geographic regions, global trade is necessary to ecosystem disruption due to the intensive harvesting of fish
balance supply and demand across regions. However, the and other aquatic foods (6).
environmental costs of food production might increase with To address these negative effects it is now widely
globalization, for example because of increased greenhouse recognized that food production systems and the food chain
gas emissions associated with increased production and food in general must become fully sustainable (18). The principle
transport (24). An unfettered market can also penalise of sustainability implies the use of resources at rates that do
particular communities and sectors, especially the poorest not exceed the capacity of the earth to replace them. By
who have the least influence on how global markets are definition, dependency on non-renewable inputs is
structured and regulated. Expanded trade can provide unsustainable even if in the short-term it is necessary as part
insurance against regional shocks on production such as of a trajectory towards sustainability.
conflict, epidemics, droughts or floods—shocks that are There are many difficulties in making sustainability
likely to increase in frequency as climate change occurs. operational. Over what spatial scale should food production
Conversely, a highly connected food system may lead to the be sustainable? Clearly an overarching goal is global
more widespread propagation of economic perturbations, as sustainability but should this goal also apply at lower levels:
in the recent banking crisis, thus affecting more people. There regions (or oceans), nations, or farms? Could high levels of
is an urgent need for a better understanding of the effects of consumption or negative externalities in some regions be
globalization on the full food system and its externalities. mitigated by improvements in other areas, or could some
The yield gap is not static. Maintaining let alone unsustainable activities in the food system be offset by
increasing productivity depends on continued innovation to actions in the non-food sector (through carbon-trading for
control weeds, diseases, insects and other pests as they evolve example)? Though simple definitions of sustainability are
resistance to different control measures, or as new species independent of time scale, in practice how fast should we
emerge or are dispersed to new regions. Innovation involves seek to move from the status quo to a sustainable food
both traditional and advanced crop and livestock breeding, as system? The challenges of climate change and competition
well as the continuing development of better chemical, for water, fossil fuels and other resources suggest a rapid
agronomic and agro-ecological control measures. The transition is essential. Nevertheless, it is also legitimate to
maximum attainable yield in different regions will also shift explore the possibility that superior technologies may become
as the effects of climate change are felt. Increasing available, and that future generations may be wealthier and
atmospheric CO levels can directly stimulate crop growth, hence better able to absorb the costs of the transition. Finally
2
though within the context of real agricultural production we do not yet have good enough metrics of sustainability, a
systems the magnitude of this effect is not clear (7). More major problem when evaluating alternative strategies and
important will be the ability to grow crops in places that are negotiating trade-offs. This is the case for relatively
currently unsuitable, particularly the northern temperate circumscribed activities such as crop production on individual
regions (though expansion of agriculture at the expense of farms and even harder when the complete food chain is
boreal forest would lead to major greenhouse gas emissions), included or for complex products that may contain
and the loss of currently productive regions because of ingredients sourced from all round the globe. There is also a
excessively high temperatures and drought. Models that danger that an over-emphasis on what can be measured
couple the physics of climate change with the biology of crop relatively simply—carbon for example—may lead to
growth will be important to help policy makers anticipate dimensions of sustainability that are harder to quantify—such
these changes, as well as to evaluate the role of “agricultural as biodiversity—being ignored. These are areas at the
biodiversity” in helping mitigate their effects (25). interface of science, engineering and economics that urgently
Closing the yield gap would dramatically increase the need more attention (see Box 1). The introduction of
supply of food but with uncertain impacts on the environment measures to promote sustainability does not necessarily
and potential feedbacks that could undermine future food reduce yields or profits. One study of 286 agricultural
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 3 / 10.1126/science.1185383
sustainability projects in developing countries, involving 12.6 ways by rising food prices, some benefitting and some being
million chiefly smallholder farmers on 37 million hectares, harmed (21). Thus while reducing distorting agricultural
found an average yield increase of 79% across a very wide support mechanisms in developed countries and liberalizing
variety of systems and crop types (27). A quarter of the world trade should stimulate food production overall in
projects reported a doubling of yield. Research on the ability developing countries, not everyone will gain (23, 32). Better
of these and related programmes to be scaled up to country models that can more accurately predict these complex
and regional levels should be a priority (Fig. 2). interactions are urgently needed.
Strategies designed to close the yield gap in the poorest
Increasing Production Limits
countries face some particular challenges (28). Much
The most productive crops such as sugar cane, growing in
production is dominated by smallholder agriculture with
optimum conditions, can convert solar energy into biomass
women often taking a dominant role in the workforce. Where
with an efficiency of ~2% resulting in high yields of biomass
viable, investment in the social and economic mechanisms to
(up to 150 t ha–1) (33). There is much debate over exactly
enable improved smallholder yields, especially where
what the theoretical limits are for the major crops under
targeted at women, can be important means of increasing the
different conditions, and similarly for the maximum yield that
income of both farm and rural non-farm households. The lack
can be obtained for livestock rearing (18). However, there is
of secure land rights can be a particular problem for many
clearly significant scope for increasing production limits.
poor communities and may act as a disincentive for
The Green Revolution succeeded by using conventional
smallholders to invest in managing the land more
breeding to develop F hybrid varieties of maize and semi-
1
productively, and make it harder to raise investment capital
dwarf, disease-resistant varieties of wheat and rice. These
(29). In a time of rising prices for food and land, it can also
varieties could be provided with more irrigation and fertiliser
render these communities vulnerable to displacement by more
(20) without the risk of major crop losses due to lodging
powerful interest groups. Where the political will and
(falling over) or severe rust epidemics. Increased yield is still
organizational infrastructure exists, title definition and
a major goal but greater water and nutrient use efficiency, as
protection could be greatly assisted by the application of
well as tolerance of abiotic stress, are likely to become of
modern information and communication technologies
increasing importance. Modern genetic techniques and better
(including GIS). But there will be many people whose income
understanding of crop physiology allow a more directed
cannot purchase sufficient calories and nutrients for a healthy
approach to selection across multiple traits. The speed and
life and who will require social protection programmes to
costs at which genomes today can be sequenced or re-
increase their ability to obtain food. However, if properly
sequenced now means that these techniques can be more
designed, these programmes can help stimulate local
easily applied to develop varieties of crop species that will
agriculture by providing smallholders with increased certainty
yield well in challenging environments. These include crops
about the demand for their products.
such as sorghum, millet, cassava and banana, species that are
There is also a role for large-scale farming operations in
staple foods for many of the world’s poorest communities
poor country agriculture, though the value and contexts
(34).
within which this is feasible are much debated (30). This
Currently, the major commercialized genetically modified
debate has been fanned by a significant increase over the last
(GM) crops involve relatively simple manipulations such as
five years in the number of sovereign wealth funds,
the insertion of a gene for herbicide resistance or another for
companies and individuals leasing, purchasing or attempting
a pest-insect toxin. The next decade will see the development
to purchase large tracts of agricultural land in developing
of combinations of desirable traits and the introduction of
countries. This external investment in developing country
new traits such as drought tolerance. By mid-century much
agriculture may bring significant benefits, especially where
more radical options involving highly polygenic traits may be
investors bring significant improvements to crop production
feasible (Table 1). Production of cloned animals with
and processing, but only if the rights and welfare of the
engineered innate immunity to diseases that reduce
tenants and existing resource users are properly addressed
production efficiency have the potential to reduce significant
(31).
losses arising from mortality and sub-clinical infections.
Many of the very poorest people live in areas so remote
Biotechnology could also produce plants for animal feed with
that they are effectively disconnected from national and world
modified composition that increase the efficiency of meat
food markets. But for others, especially the urban poor,
production and lower methane emissions.
higher food prices have a direct negative effect on their
Domestication inevitably means that only a subset of the
ability to purchase a healthy diet. Many rural farmers and
genes available in the wild-species progenitor gene pool is
other food producers live near the margin of being net food
represented among crop varieties and livestock breeds. Novel
consumers and producers, and will be affected in complex
genetic material from land races, rare breeds and wild
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 4 / 10.1126/science.1185383
relatives will be important in allowing breeders to respond to potential benefits are exaggerated in public debate. Efforts to
new challenges. International collections and genebanks increase sustainable production limits which benefit the
provide valuable repositories for such genetic variation but it poorest will need to be based around new alliances of
is nevertheless necessary to ensure that locally adapted crop businesses, civil society organizations and governments.
and livestock germplasm is not lost in the process of their
Reducing Waste
displacement by modern, improved varieties and breeds. The
Roughly 30 to 40% of food in both the developed and
trend over recent decades is of a general decline in investment
developing world is lost to waste, though the causes are very
in technological innovation in food production (with some
different (Fig. 3) (16, 37–39). In the developing world, losses
notable exceptions such as in China and Brazil) and a switch
are due mainly to the absence of food chain infrastructure,
from public to private sources (1). Fair returns on investment
and to lack of knowledge or investment in storage
are essential for the proper functioning of the private sector,
technologies on the farm, although data is scarce. For
but the extension of the protection of intellectual property
example, in India it is estimated that 35 to 40% of fresh
rights to biotechnology has led to a growing public perception
produce is lost because neither wholesale nor retail outlets
in some countries that biotech research purely benefits
have cold storage (16). Even with rice grain, which can be
commercial interests and offers no long-term public good.
stored more readily, as much as a third of the harvest in
Just as seriously, it also led to a virtual monopoly of GM
South-East Asia can be lost after harvest to pests and spoilage
traits in some parts of the world, by a restricted number of
(40). But the picture is more complex than a simple lack of
companies which limits innovation and investment in the
storage facilities: although storage after harvest when there is
technology. Finding ways to incentivise wide access and
a glut of food would seem to make economic sense, the
sustainability, whilst encouraging a competitive and
farmer often has to sell immediately to raise cash.
innovative private sector to make best use of developing
By contrast, in the developed world, pre-retail losses are
technology, is a major governance challenge.
much lower, but those arising at the retail, food service and
The issue of trust and public acceptance of biotechnology
home stages of the food chain have grown dramatically in
has been highlighted by the debate over the acceptance of
recent years, for a variety of reasons (41). Food is at present
GM technologies. Because GM involves germ-line
relatively cheap, at least for these consumers, which reduces
modification of an organism and its introduction to the
the incentives to avoid waste. Consumers have become
environment and food chain, a number of particular
accustomed to purchasing foods of the highest cosmetic
environmental and food safety issues need to be assessed.
standards and hence retailers discard many edible yet only
Despite the introduction of rigorous science-based risk
slightly blemished products. Commercial pressures can
assessment, this discussion has become highly politicized and
encourage waste: the food service industry frequently uses
polarized in some countries, particularly in Europe. Our view
“supersized” portions as a competitive lever, while “buy one
is that GM is a potentially valuable technology whose
get one free” offers have the same function for retailers.
advantages and disadvantages need to be considered
Litigation and lack of education on food safety has lead to a
rigorously on an evidential, inclusive, case-by-case basis: that
reliance on “use by dates” whose safety margins often mean
it should neither be privileged nor automatically dismissed.
that food fit for consumption is thrown away. In some
We also accept the need for this technology to gain greater
developed countries, unwanted food goes to landfill rather
public acceptance and trust before it can be considered as one
than being used as animal feed or compost because of
amongst a set of technologies which may contribute to
legislation to control prion diseases.
improved global food security.
Different strategies are required to tackle the two types of
There are particular issues involving new technologies,
waste. In developing countries public investment in transport
both GM and non-GM, targeted at helping the least developed
infrastructure would reduce the opportunities for spoilage
countries (35, 36). The technologies must be directed at the
while better functioning markets and the availability of
needs of those communities which are often different from
capital would increase the efficiency of the food chain, for
those of more developed country farmers. To increase the
example by allowing the introduction of cold storage (though
likelihood that new technology works for, and is adopted by,
note this has implications for greenhouse emissions) (38).
the poorest, they need to be involved in the framing,
Existing technologies and best practice need to be spread by
prioritization, risk assessment and regulation of innovations.
education and extension services, and market and finance
This will often require the creation of novel institutional and
mechanisms are required to protect farmers from having to
governance mechanisms taking into account socio-cultural
sell at peak supply leading to gluts and wastage. There is also
context, for example the importance of women in developing
a need for continuing research in post-harvest storage
country food production. New technologies offer significant
technologies. Improved technology for small scale food
promise, but there are risks in terms of loss of trust if their
storage in poorer contexts is a prime candidate for the
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 5 / 10.1126/science.1185383
introduction of state incentives for private innovation, with containing a high proportion of meat (especially red meat)
the involvement of small scale traders, millers and producers. and dairy products. As developing countries consume more
If food prices were to rise again, it is likely that there meat in combination with high sugar and fat foods they may
would be a decrease in the volume of waste produced by find themselves having to deal with obesity before they have
consumers in developed countries. Waste may also be overcome under-nutrition, leading to an increase in spending
reduced by alerting consumers to the scale of the issue, as on health that could otherwise be used to alleviate poverty.
well as to domestic strategies for reducing food loss. Livestock production is also a major source of methane, a
Advocacy, education and possibly legislation may also reduce very powerful greenhouse gas, though this can be partially
waste in the food service and retail sectors. Legislation such offset by the use of animal manure to replace synthetic
as that on sell-by dates and swill that has inadvertently nitrogen fertilizer (43). Of the five strategies we discuss here,
increased food waste should be re-examined within a more assessing the value of decreasing the fraction of meat in our
inclusive competing risks framework. Reducing developed- diets is the most difficult and needs to be better understood.
country food waste is particularly challenging as it is so
Expanding Aquaculture
closely linked to individual behaviour and cultural attitudes to
Aquatic products (largely fish, aquatic molluscs, and
food.
crustaceans) have a critical role in the food system providing
Changing Diets nearly 3 billion people with at least 15% of their animal
The conversion efficiency of plant into animal matter is ~10% protein intake (see Crowder).
and thus there is a prima facie case that more people could be In many regions aquaculture has been sufficiently
supported from the same amount of land if they were profitable to permit strong growth, and replicating this in
vegetarians. About a third of global cereal production is fed areas such as Africa where this has not occurred could bring
to animals (42). But currently one of the major challenges to significant benefits. Technical advances in hatchery systems,
the food system is the rapidly increasing demand for meat and feeds and feed delivery systems, and disease management
dairy products that has led over the last 50 years to a ~1.5- could all increase output. Future gains may also come from
fold increase in the global numbers of cattle, sheep and goats, better stock selection, larger scale production technologies,
with equivalent increases of ~2.5- and ~4.5-fold for pigs and aquaculture in open seas and larger inland water bodies, and
chicken, respectively (2) (Fig. 1). This is largely due to the the culture of a wider range of species. The long production
increased wealth of consumers everywhere and most recently cycle of many species (typically 6 to 24 months) requires a
in countries such as China and India. financing system capable of providing working capital as well
However, the argument that all meat consumption is bad is as offsetting risk. Wider production options (such as
overly simplistic. First, there is substantial variation in the temperature and salinity tolerance and disease resistance) and
production efficiency and environmental impact of the major cheaper feed substrates (for example plant material with
classes of meat consumed by people (Table 2). Second, whilst enhanced nutritional features) might also be accessed using
a substantial fraction of livestock is fed on grain and other GM technologies.
plant protein which could feed humans, there remains a very Aquaculture may cause harm to the environment because
significant proportion which is grass-fed. Much of the of the release into water bodies of organic effluents or disease
grassland used to feed these animals could not be converted treatment chemicals; indirectly through its dependence on
to arable, or could only be converted with significant adverse industrial fisheries to supply feeds, and by acting as a source
environmental outcomes. In addition, pigs and poultry are of diseases or genetic contamination for wild species. Efforts
often fed on human food “waste.” Third, through better to reduce these negative externalities and increase the
rearing or improved breeds it may be possible to increase the efficiency of resource use—the fish-in-fish-out ratio (44)—
efficiency with which meat is produced. Finally, in have been spurred by the rise of sustainability certification
developing countries meat represents the most concentrated programmes, though these mainly affect only higher value
source of some vitamins and minerals, which is important for sectors. Gains in sustainability could come from
individuals such as young children. Livestock also are used concentrating on lower trophic level species and in
for ploughing and transport, provide a local supply of integrating aquatic and terrestrial food production, for
manure, can be a vital source of income and are of huge example by using waste from the land as food and nutrients.
cultural significance for many poorer communities. It will also be important to take a more strategic approach to
Reducing the consumption of meat and increasing the site location and capacity within catchment or coastal zone
proportion that is derived from the most efficient sources, management units (45).
offer an opportunity to feed more people, and also present
Conclusions
other advantages (37). Well-balanced diets rich in grain and
There is no simple solution to feeding sustainably nine billion
other vegetable products are considered healthier than those
people, especially as many become increasingly better off and
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 6 / 10.1126/science.1185383
converge on rich-country consumption patterns. A broad 15. A. Balmford, R. E. Green, J. P. W. Scharlemann, Glob.
range of options, including those we discuss here, needs to be Change Biol. 11, 1594 (2005).
pursued simultaneously. We are hopeful about scientific and 16. C. Nellemann et al., Eds., The Enviromental Food Crisis
technological innovation in the food system, but not as an (UNEP, 2009).
excuse to delay difficult decisions today. 17. J. Fargione, J. Hill, D. Tilman, S. Polasky, P. Hawthorne,
Any optimism must be tempered by the enormous Science 319, 1235 (2008).
challenges of making food production sustainable while 18. Royal Society, Reaping the Benefits: Science and the
controlling greenhouse gas emission and conserving Sustainable Intensification of Global Agriculture (Royal
dwindling water supplies, as well as meeting the Millennium Society, London, 2009).
Development Goal of ending hunger. And we must avoid the 19. K. G. Cassman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 5952
temptation to sacrifice further the earth’s already hugely (1999).
depleted biodiversity for easy gains in food production, not 20. R. E. Evenson, D. Gollin, Science 300, 758 (2003).
only because biodiversity provides many of the public goods 21. P. Hazell, L. Haddad, Food Agriculture and the
upon which mankind relies, but also because we do not have Environment Discussion Paper 34 (IRPRI, Washington
the right to deprive future generations of its economic and DC, 2001).
cultural benefits. Together these challenges amount to a 22. FAAP, Framework for African Agricultural Productivity
perfect storm. (FARA, Accra, Ghana, 2006).
Navigating the storm will require a revolution in the social 23. K. Anderson, Ed., Distortions to Agricultural Incentives,
and natural sciences concerned with food production as well a Global Perspective 1955-2007 (Palgrave Macmillan,
as a breaking down of barriers between fields. The goal is no London, 2009).
longer just to maximise productivity, but to optimise across a 24. J. Pretty, T. Lang, A. Ball, J. Morison, Food Policy 30, 1
far more complex landscape of production, environmental (2005).
and social justice outcomes. 25. G. C. Nelson et al., Climate Change: Impact on
Agriculture and Costs of Adaptation (IFPRI, Washington,
References and Notes
DC, 2009).
1. World Bank, World Development Report 2008: Agriculture 26. N. Stern, The Economics of Climate Change (Cambridge
for Development (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2008). Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2007).
2. FAOSTAT, in http://faostat.fao.org/default.aspx (2009). 27. J. N. Pretty et al., Environmental Science and Technology
3. FAO, State of Food Insecurity in the World 2009 (FAO, 40, 1114 (2006).
Rome, Italy, 2009). 28. P. Hazell, S. Wood, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
4. A. Evans, The Feeding of the Nine Billion: Global Food 363, 495 (2008).
Security (Chatham House, London, 2009). 29. K. Deininger, G. Feder, World Bank Research Observer
5. D. Tilman et al., Science 292, 281 (2001). 24, 233 (2009).
6. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Ecosystems and 30. P. Collier, Foreign Aff. 87, 67 (2008).
Human Well-Being (World Resources Institute, 31. L. Cotula, S. Vermeulen, L. Leonard, J. Keeley, Land
Washington, DC, 2005). Grab or Development Opportunity? Agricultural
7. IPCC, Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Investment and International Land Deals in Africa
Panel on Climate Change (Contribution of Working [International Institute for Environment and Development
Group II) (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2007). (with FAO & IFAD), London, 2009].
8. J. Schmidhuber, F. N. Tubiello, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 32. A. Aksoy, J. C. Beghin, Eds., Global Agricultural Trade
U.S.A. 104, 19703 (2007). and Developing Countries (World Bank, Washington, DC,
9. J. von Braun, The World Food Situation: New Driving 2005).
Forces and Required Actions (IFPRI, Washington, DC, 33. R. A. Gilbert, J. M. Shine, J. D. Miller, R. W. Rice, C. R.
2007). Rainbolt, Field Crops Research 95, 156 (2006).
10. G. Conway, The Doubly Green Revolution (Penguin 34. IAASTD, International Assessment of Agricultural
Books, London, 1997). Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development:
11. J. Piesse, C. Thirtle, Food Policy 34, 119 (2009). Executive Summary of the Synthesis Report
12. Royal Society, Sustainable Biofuels: Prospects and (www.agassessment.org/index.cfm?Page=About_IAASTD
Challenges (Royal Society, London, 2008). &ItemID=2, 2008).
13. R. Skidelsky, The Return of the Master (Allen Lane, 35. P. G. Lemaux, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 60, 511 (2009).
2009). 36. D. Lea, Ethical Theory Moral Pract. 11, 37 (2008).
14. J. Pretty, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 363, 447
(2008).
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 7 / 10.1126/science.1185383
37. Cabinent Office, Food Matters: Towards a Strategy for techniques. Contour stone bunds, half moons, stone bunding
the 21st Century (Cabinet Office Stategy Unit, London, and improved traditional planting pits (zaı¨) were used to
2008). rehabilitate barren, crusted land. More than 300,000 ha have
38. WRAP, The Food We Waste (Waste and Resources been rehabilitated, and crop yields have increased and
Action Programme, Banbury, Oxon, 2008). become more stable year to year. Tree cover has increased, as
39. T. Stuart, Uncovering the Global Food Scandal (Penguin, shown in the photographs. Development of the land market,
London, 2009). and continued incremental expansion of the treated area
40. FAO, www.fao.org/News/Factfile/ff9712e.htm (1997). without further project assistance indicate that the outcomes
41. California Integrated Waste Management Board are sustainable (50).
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/FoodWaste/FAQ.htm#Discards,
Fig. 3. The makeup of total food waste in developed and
2007).
developing countries. Retail, food service, and home and
42. FAO, World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050 (FAO,
municipal are lumped together for developing countries.
Rome, Italy, 2006).
Source: references (16, 37–39).
43. FAO, World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050 (FAO,
Rome, Italy, 2003).
44. A. G. J. Tacon, M. Metian, Aquaculture 285, 146 (2008).
45. D. Whitmarsh, N. G. Palmieri, in Aquaculture in the
Ecosystem, M. Holmer, K. Black, C. M. Duarte, N. Marba,
I. Karakassis, Eds. (Springer, Berlin, Germany, 2008).
46. P. R. Hobbs, K. Sayre, R. Gupta, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B
Biol. Sci. 363, 543 (2008).
47. W. Day, E. Audsley, A. R. Frost, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B
Biol. Sci. 363, 527 (2008).
48. J. Gressel, Genetic Glass Ceilings (Johns Hopkins Univ.
Press, Baltimore, 2008).
49. FAO, Livestock’s Long Shadow (FAO, Rome, Italy,
2006).
50. C. P. Reij, E. M. A. Smaling, Land Use Pol. 25, 410
(2008).
51. The authors are members of the U.K. Government Office
for Science’s Foresight Project on Global Food and
Farming Futures. J.R.B. is also affiliated with Imperial
College London. D.L. is a Board Member of Plastid AS
(Norway) and owns shares in AstraZeneca PLC and
Syngenta AG.
1 December 2009; accepted 12 January 2010
Published online 28 January 2010; 10.1126/science.1185383
Include this information when citing this paper.
Fig. 1. Changes in the relative global production of crops and
animals since 1961 (when relative production scaled to 1 in
1961); (A) major crop plants and (B) major types of
livestock. Source: reference (2).
Fig. 2. An example of a major successful sustainable
agriculture project. Niger was strongly affected by a series of
drought years in the 1970s and 1980s and by environmental
degradation. From the early 1980s, donors invested
substantially in soil and water conservation. The total area
treated is in the order of 300,000 ha, most of which went into
the rehabilitation of degraded land. The project in the Illela
District of Niger promoted simple water harvesting
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 8 / 10.1126/science.1185383
Box 1. Sustainable intensification.
Producing more food from the same area of land while reducing the environmental impacts requires
what has been called sustainable intensification (18). In exactly the same way that yields can be
increased using existing technologies, many options currently exist to reduce negative externalities
(46). Net reductions in some greenhouse gas emissions can potentially be achieved by changing
agronomic practices, the adoption of integrated pest management methods, the integrated management
of waste in livestock production, and the use of agroforestry. However, the effects of different
agronomic practices on the full range of greenhouse gases can be very complex and may depend on the
temporal and spatial scale of measurement. More research is required to allow a better assessment of
competing policy options. Strategies such as zero or reduced tillage (the reduction in inversion
ploughing), contour farming, mulches and cover crops improve water and soil conservation but they
may not increase stocks of soil carbon or reduce emissions of nitrous oxide. Precision agriculture refers
to a series of technologies that allow the application of water, nutrients and pesticides only to the places
and at the times they are required, thereby optimizing the use of inputs (47). Finally, agricultural land
and water bodies used for aquaculture and fisheries can be managed in ways specifically designed to
reduce negative impacts on biodiversity.
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 9 / 10.1126/science.1185383
Table 1. Examples of current and potential future applications of GM technology for crop genetic improvement.
Time scale Target crop trait Target crops
Current tolerance to broad-spectrum herbicide maize, soybean, oilseed brassica
resistance to chewing insect pests maize, cotton, oilseed brassica
Short-term (5–10 nutritional bio-fortification staple cereal crops, sweet potato
years)
resistance to fungus and virus potato, wheat, rice, banana, fruits,
pathogens vegetables
resistance to sucking insect pests rice, fruits, vegetables
improved processing and storage wheat, potato, fruits, vegetables
drought tolerance staple cereal and tuber crops
Medium-term (10–20 salinity tolerance staple cereal and tuber crops
years)
increased nitrogen-use efficiency
high-temperature tolerance
Long-term (>20 years) apomixis staple cereal and tuber crops
nitrogen fixation
denitrification inhibitor production
conversion to perennial habit
increased photosynthetic efficiency
Source: references (18, 48).
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 10 / 10.1126/science.1185383
Table 2. Comparison of the impact of grazing and intensive (confined/industrialized) grain-fed livestock systems on water use,
grain requirement and methane production. Service water is that required for cleaning and washing livestock housing and other
facilities.
Grazing Intensive
Water Measure of water use Liters d–1 animal–1 at 15°C
drinking water – all 22 103
cattle service water – beef 5 11
service water – dairy 5 22
drinking water 17 17
pigs (lactating adult) service water 25 125
drinking water 9 9
sheep (lactating adult) service water 5 5
drinking water 1.3–1.8 1.3–1.8
chicken (broiler and layer) service water 0.09–0.15 0.09–0.15
feed required to produce 1 kg of meat kg cereal animal–1
– 8
cattle
– 4
pigs
– 1
chicken (broiler)
methane emissions from cattle kg CH animal–1 year–1
4
– 117–128
cattle: dairy (U.S. and Europe)
53-60 –
cattle: beef, dairy (U.S. and Europe)
– 45–58
cattle: dairy (Africa, India)
27–31 –
cattle: grazing (Africa, India)
Sources: references (7, 49). This table does not include other impacts of differing livestock management systems such as (i)
nutrient run-off and pollution to surface and groundwater; (ii) protozoan and bacterial contamination of water and food; (iii)
antibiotic residues in water and food; (iv) heavy metal from feed in soils and water; (v) odour nuisance from wastes; (vi) inputs
used for feed production and lost to the environment; (vii) livestock-related land-use change.
/ www.sciencexpress.org / 28 January 2010 / Page 11 / 10.1126/science.1185383
