Review
Recycling lithium-ion batteries from electric
vehicles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1682-5 Gavin Harper1,2,3*, Roberto Sommerville1,2,4, Emma Kendrick1,2,3, Laura Driscoll1,2,5,
Peter Slater1,2,5, Rustam Stolkin1,2,3,6, Allan Walton1,2,3, Paul Christensen1,7, Oliver Heidrich1,7,8,
Received: 14 January 2019
Simon Lambert1,7, Andrew Abbott1,9, Karl Ryder1,9, Linda Gaines10 & Paul Anderson1,2,5*
Accepted: 23 July 2019
Published online: 6 November 2019
Rapid growth in the market for electric vehicles is imperative, to meet global targets
There are amendments to this paper for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, to improve air quality in urban centres and to
meet the needs of consumers, with whom electric vehicles are increasingly popular.
However, growing numbers of electric vehicles present a serious waste-management
challenge for recyclers at end-of-life. Nevertheless, spent batteries may also present an
opportunity as manufacturers require access to strategic elements and critical
materials for key components in electric-vehicle manufacture: recycled lithium-ion
batteries from electric vehicles could provide a valuable secondary source of materials.
Here we outline and evaluate the current range of approaches to electric-vehicle
lithium-ion battery recycling and re-use, and highlight areas for future progress.
optimize material use and life-cycle impacts2. Markets for energy storage
Anniversary
are under development as energy regulators in various locations transi-
collection:
tion to cleaner energy sources. Energy storage is particularly sought-
go.nature.com/
after in areas where weak grids require reinforcement, where high
nature150
penetration of renewables requires supply to be balanced with demand,
where there is an opportunity for trading energy with the grid and in off-
grid applications. Second-use battery projects have started to develop
in locations where there is regulatory and market alignment. However,
The electric-vehicle revolution, driven by the imperatives to decarbonize large concentrations of waste—be it for refurbishment, re-manufacture,
personal transportation in order to meet global targets for reductions dismantling or final disposal—can create substantial challenges. A fire
in greenhouse gas emissions and improve air quality in urban centres, is in stockpiled tyres in Powys, Wales, for example, smouldered for fifteen
set to change the automotive industry radically. In 2017, sales of electric years from 1989 to 2004. Since the electrode materials in LIBs are far
vehicles exceeded one million cars per year worldwide for the first time1. more reactive than tyre rubber3, without a proactive and economically
Making conservative assumptions of an average battery pack weight sound waste-management strategy for LIBs there are potentially greater
of 250 kg and volume of half a cubic metre, the resultant pack wastes dangers associated with stockpiling of end-of-life LIBs. Already the
would comprise around 250,000 tonnes and half a million cubic metres number of fires being reported in metal-recovery facilities is increas-
of unprocessed pack waste, when these vehicles reach the end of their ing4, owing to the illicit or accidental concealment of (consumer) LIBs
lives. Although re-use and current recycling processes can divert some in the guise of, for example, lead–acid batteries. Among examples of
of these wastes from landfill, the cumulative burden of electric-vehicle recent major fires are those that took place in metal-recovery facilities
waste is substantial given the growth trajectory of the electric-vehicle in Shoreway, San Carlos, USA, in September 20165, Guernsey in August
market. This waste presents a number of serious challenges of scale; in 2018 and Tacoma, Washington, USA, in September 2018.
terms of storing batteries before repurposing or final disposal, in the Waste may also represent a valuable resource. Elements and materials
manual testing and dismantling processes required for either, and in contained in electric-vehicle batteries are not available in many nations
the chemical separation processes that recycling entails. and access to resources is crucial in ensuring a stable supply chain. In the
Given that the environmental footprint of manufacturing electric future, electric vehicles may prove to be a valuable secondary resource
vehicles is heavily affected by the extraction of raw materials and pro- for critical materials, and it has been argued that high-cobalt-content
duction of lithium ion batteries, the resulting waste streams will inevi- batteries should be recycled immediately to bolster cobalt supplies6.
tably place different demands on end-of-life dismantling and recycling If tens of millions of electric vehicles are to be produced annually, care-
systems. In the waste management hierarchy, re-use is considered pref- ful husbandry of the resources consumed by electric-vehicle battery
erable to recycling (Fig. 1). Because considerable value is embedded in manufacturing will surely be essential to ensure the sustainability of
manufactured lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), it has been suggested that the automotive industry of the future, as will a material- and energy-
their use should be cascaded through a hierarchy of applications to efficient 3R system (reduce, re-use, recycle). Here we give an overview
1Faraday Institution, ReLiB Project, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 2Birmingham Centre for Strategic Elements and Critical Materials, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
3School of Metallurgy and Materials, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 4School of Chemical Engineering, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 5School of Chemistry,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 6National Centre for Nuclear Robotics, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 7School of Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
8Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK. 9Materials Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK. 10ReCell Center, Argonne National Laboratory,
Lemont, IL, USA. *e-mail: g.d.j.harper@bham.ac.uk; p.a.anderson@bham.ac.uk
Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019 | 75
Review
Waste management hierarchy
Prevention
Range of recycling technologies
Re-use
Advanced battery recycling: automated disassembly
RReeccyycclliinngg C o o f m pr p o l c e e x s it s y ‘M m i a x t i e n r g ia ’ l o s f A m m a o te u r n ia t l o s f m Va a l t u e e ri a o l f s
streams recovered recovered
Recovery Present battery recycling: shredding, pyrometallurgy
Disposal
Fig. 1 | The waste management hierarchy and range of recycling options. The materials (high economic importance, but at risk of short supply) and that
waste management hierarchy is a concept that was developed from the Council electric vehicles should be lighter and have smaller batteries. ‘Re-use’ means
Directive 75/442/EEC of 15 July 1975 (https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ that electric-vehicle batteries should have a second use. ‘Recycling’ means that
EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A31975L0442) on waste by the Dutch politician Ad batteries should be recycled, recovering as much material as possible and
Lansink, in 1979, who presented to the Dutch parliament a simple schematic preserving any structural value and quality (for example, preventing
representation that has been termed ‘Lansink’s Ladder’, ranking waste contamination). ‘Recovery’ means using some battery materials as energy for
management options from the most to least environmentally desirable options. processes such as fuel for pyrometallurgy. Finally, ‘disposal’ means that no value
Here, that hierarchy is expanded to consider the range of battery recycling is recovered and the waste goes to landfill.
technologies. ‘Prevention’ means that LIBs are designed to use less-critical
Battery assessment and disassembly
of the current state of the art and identify some of the important issues
relating to the end-of-life management of electric-vehicle LIBs. The waste-management hierarchy considers re-use to be preferable to
recycling (Fig. 1). As considerable value is embedded in manufactured
LIBs, it has been suggested that their use should be cascaded through
Social and environmental impacts of LIBs
a hierarchy of applications to optimize material use and life-cycle
If we consider the two main modes of primary production, it takes impacts2. Energy stored over energy invested (ESOI)—the ratio between
250 tons of the mineral ore spodumene7,8 when mined, or 750 tons of the energy that must be invested into manufacturing the battery and the
mineral-rich brine7,8 to produce one ton of lithium. The processing of electrical energy that it will store over its useful life—is a metric used to
large amounts of raw materials can result in considerable environmental compare the efficacy of different energy-storage technologies. Clearly,
impacts9. Production from brine, for example, entails drilling a hole in ESOI figures will improve if end-of-life electric-vehicle batteries can be
the salt flat, and pumping of the mineral-rich solution to the surface. used in second-use applications for which the battery performance is
However, this mining activity depletes water tables. In Chile’s Salar de less critical.
Atacama, a major centre of lithium production, 65% of the region’s water Profitable second-use applications also provide a potential value
is consumed by mining activities9. This affects farmers in the region who stream that can offset the eventual cost of recycling, and already a
must then import water from other regions. The demands on water healthy market is developing in used electric-vehicle batteries for energy
from the processing of lithium produced in this way are substantial, storage in certain localities, with demand potentially outstripping sup-
with a ton of lithium requiring 1,900 tons of water to extract, which is ply. For the moment the economics of the decision whether to recycle
consumed by evaporation9. or re-use are set firmly in favour of re-use. The main factors are (1) the
By contrast, secondary production would require only 28 tons of refurbishment cost of putting the battery into a second-use application
used LIBs7,8,10 (around 256 used electric-vehicle LiBs8). The net impact and (2) any credit that would accrue as the result of recycling the bat-
of LIB production can be greatly reduced if more materials can be tery instead; if the second-use price were to fall below the sum of the
recovered from end-of-life LIBs, in as close to usable form as possible11. refurbishment cost and the recycling credit, then recycling would be
However, in the rapid-growth phase of the electric-vehicle market, the economically favoured option19. In time, it is anticipated19 that the
recycling alone cannot come close to replenishing mineral supplies12. supply of used electric-vehicle batteries will far exceed the quantity that
LIBs are anticipated to last 15–20 years12 based on calendar aging the second-use market can absorb. It must be remembered, therefore,
(the aging due to time since manufacture) predictions—three times that—if disposal to landfill is to be avoided—recycling must be the ulti-
longer than lead–acid batteries12. Initial concerns regarding mate fate of all LIBs, even if they first have a second use.
resource constraints for LIB production scale-up focused on lithium13; Given that stockpiling of waste batteries is potentially unsafe and
however, in the near term, reserves of lithium are unlikely to present a environmentally undesirable, if direct re-use of an LIB module is not
constraint14,15. possible, it must be repaired or recycled. End-of-life LIB recycling could
Of greater immediate concern are cobalt reserves16, which are geo- provide important economic benefits, avoiding the need for new min-
graphically concentrated (mainly in the politically unstable Democratic eral extraction20 and providing resilience against vulnerable links21
Republic of the Congo). These have experienced wild short-term price and supply risks22 in the LIB supply chain. For most remanufacture and
fluctuations and raise multifarious social, ethical and environmental recycling processes, battery packs must be disassembled to module
concerns around their extraction, including artisanal mines employing level at least. However, the hazards associated with battery disassem-
child labour17. In addition to the environmental imperative for recycling, bly are also numerous23,24. Disassembly of battery packs from automo-
there are clearly serious ethical concerns with the materials supply tive applications requires high-voltage training and insulated tools
chain, and these social burdens are borne by some of the world’s most to prevent electrocution of operators or short-circuiting of the pack.
vulnerable people. Given the global nature of the industry, this will Short-circuiting results in rapid discharge, which may lead to heating
require international coordination to support a concerted push towards and thermal runaway. Thermal runaway may result in the generation of
recycling LIBs and a circular economy in materials18. particularly noxious byproducts, including HF gas25, which along with
76 | Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019
other product gases may become trapped and ultimately result in cells the modules or for recycling. The weights and high voltages of trac-
exploding23. The cells also present a chemical hazard owing to the flam- tion batteries mean that qualified employees and specialized tools are
mable electrolyte, toxic and carcinogenic electrolyte additives, and the required for such dismantling25. This is a challenge for an industry in
potentially toxic or carcinogenic electrode materials. transition with a shortage of skills. An Institute of the Motor Industry
survey found only 1,000 trained technicians in the UK capable of servic-
Diagnostics of battery pack, modules and cells ing electric vehicles30, with another 1,000 in training. Given there are
‘State of health’ is the degree to which a battery meets its initial design 170,000 motor technicians in the UK, this represents less than 2% of the
specifications. Over time as the battery degrades, its performance var- workforce. There is concern that untrained mechanics may risk their
ies from its initial condition. The units are percentage points, with 100% lives repairing electric vehicles31, and these concerns logically extend
indicating a state of health that is identical to that of a new battery meet- to those handling vehicles at the end-of-life. Additionally, it has been
ing its design specification. (Some new batteries may leave the factory suggested32 that manual dismantling, in countries with high labour
deviating from design specifications, and having less than 100% state of costs, is uneconomic with respect to revenues from extracted materi-
health.) The ‘state of charge’ is the degree to which a battery is charged als or components. Vehicle design has to strike compromises between
or discharged. Again, the units are percentage points, with 0% indicating crash safety, centre of gravity and space optimization, which must be
empty and 100% indicating full). balanced against serviceability25. These conflicting design objectives
Battery repurposing—the re-use of packs, modules and cells in other often result in designs that are not optimized for recyclability, and that
applications such as charging stations and stationary energy storage— can be time-consuming to disassemble manually25.
requires accurate assessment of both the state of health, to categorize
whether batteries are best suited for re-use (and if so, for which applica- Automating battery disassembly
tions), remanufacture or recycling, and the state of charge, for safety Robotic battery disassembly could eliminate the risk of harm to human
reasons in some recycling processes. For high-throughput triage and workers, and increased automation would reduce cost, potentially mak-
gateway testing of batteries at scale, the optimal approach involves ing recycling economically viable. This is being piloted in a number
in situ techniques for monitoring cells in service to enable advance of current research projects33–36. Importantly, automation could also
warning of possible cell replacement, and module or pack recondition- improve the mechanical separation of materials and components,
ing, rather than complete repurposing at a low level of state of health enhancing the purity of segregated materials and making downstream
owing to a few failing cells. separation and recycling processes more efficient. The automation of
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy can give information on the dismantling of automotive batteries, however, presents major chal-
the state of health of cells, modules and, potentially, full packs26, and lenges. This is because robotics and automation in the manufacturing
also an indication of aging mechanisms such as lithium plating. Such sector rely on highly structured environments, in which robots make pre-
measurements have the potential to inform a decision matrix for re-use programmed repetitive actions with respect to exactly known objects
or disassembly and processing and, importantly, to identify potential in fixed positions. In contrast, the development of robotic systems that
hazards that would have further consequences for downstream process- can generalize to a variety of objects, and handle uncertainty, remains
ing. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy has been researched for a major challenge at the frontier of artificial intelligence research. It is
gateway testing in primary production, for example, in a large battery important to consider the complexity of vehicle battery disassembly
production plant in the UK27,28. A number of electric-vehicle manufactur- from this perspective.
ers plan to use similar technologies to manage and maintain electric- At present there is no standardization37 of design for battery packs,
vehicle battery packs through the identification and replacement of modules or cells within the automotive sector, and it is unlikely that
failing modules in the field. Substantial advantages in cost, safety and this will happen in the near future. Other battery-reliant products, such
throughput time are anticipated if this process can be mostly or fully as mobile phones, have seen an exponential proliferation of different
automated27,29. In future, more advanced diagnostic functionality will sizes, shapes and types of battery over the past two decades. At present,
be embedded in battery management systems, providing data that can much of the factory assembly of these batteries is done by human work-
be interrogated at end-of-life. ers and remains unautomated. Their disassembly and waste-handling
typically involve even less structured environments, with much greater
Challenges of pack and module disassembly uncertainties, than a manufacturing assembly line.
Different vehicle manufacturers have adopted different approaches Nevertheless, some progress has been made towards automated
for powering their vehicles, and electric vehicles on the market pos- sorting of consumer batteries. The Optisort system38,39 uses computer
sess a wide variety of different physical configurations, cell types vision algorithms to recognize the labels on batteries, and then pneu-
and cell chemistries. This presents a challenge for battery recycling. matic actuators to segregate batteries into different bins according to
Figure 2 details three different types of battery cell design, and their their type of chemistry. However, Optisort is currently limited to AA and
respective packs from electric vehicles in the marketplace from model AAA batteries, and a large amount of pre-sorting by hand is needed to
year 2014. It can be seen that the three vehicles possess very differ- separate these from mixed batches of waste batteries, prior to entering
ent physical configurations, requiring different approaches for dis- the Optisort machine.
assembly, particularly regarding automation. It can be seen in Fig. 2 The Society for Automotive Engineers and the Battery Association
that at the different scales of disassembly, the format and relative size of Japan have both recommended labelling standards for electric-
of the different components differ, presenting challenges for auto- vehicle batteries. Recent algorithms from computer vision research
mation. The differing form factors and capacities may also restrict have some capability to recognize objects and materials on the basis
applications for re-use. And finally, Fig. 2 illustrates that manufactur- of features such as size, shape, colour and texture. However, it could be
ers employ varying cell chemistries (see Fig. 3), which will necessitate advantageous for recycling if manufacturers were to (some manufactur-
different approaches to materials reclamation and strongly affect the ers already do) include labels, QR Codes, RfID tags or other machine-
overall economics of recycling. Whereas the prismatic and pouch cells readable features on key battery components and sub-structures.
have planar electrodes, the cylindrical cells are tightly coiled, presenting Where these provide a reference to an external data source, its utility
additional challenges to separating the electrodes for direct recycling in aiding the recycling process will depend on the accessibility and
processes. format of that data. If proprietary and private, such data are of limited
For repurposing and second-use applications, automotive battery use, but there may be initiatives to move towards standardization and
packs are currently dismantled by hand for either the second use of open data formats. A number of companies are considering blockchain
Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019 | 77
Review
Cylindrical Prismatic Pouch
Tesla model S 85 Mk1 kWh battery pack BMW i3 Mk1 22-kWh battery pack Nissan Leaf Mk1 22-kWh battery pack
Panasonic Samsung/SDI AESC
375 V 355.2 V 360 V
127 mm 530 kg 235 kg 294 kg
259 mm
265 mm
Pack
2,830 mm
1,772 mm 1,660 mm 1,570 mm 1,188 mm
963 mm
16 modules per pack 8 modules per pack 48 modules per pack
25 kg 24.5 kg 3.8 kg
79 mm 150 mm 35 mm
Module 665 mm
302 mm 225 mm 303 mm
311 mm 360 mm
444 cells per module 12 cells per module 4 cells per module
Ø 18 mm
123 mm 7.9 mm
65 mm
Cell
173 mm 260 mm
225 mm
45 mm
Cells shown at
magnification of 3.6 V NCA cathode 3.7 V NMC cathode 3.75 V LMO/NMC cathode
10 relative to rest 48.5 g Graphite anode 2 kg Graphite anode 914 g Graphite anode
of diagram
Fig. 2 | Examples of three different battery packs and modules (cylindrical, contain high cobalt levels. Each cell has particular recycling challenges.
prismatic and pouch cells) in use in current electric cars. The three designs Cylindrical cells are often bonded into a module using epoxy resin (difficult to
examined are from model year 2014; this is based on the availability of remove or recycle); fuses at each end may be blown, making cell discharge
information from vehicle teardowns, and also because older vehicles are more challenging; and the cell geometry can be difficult to dismantle for direct
likely to be closer to end-of-life than today’s new cars. The breakdowns include recycling. Prismatic cells require ‘can opening’ (requiring special tools) to
material content in a cell, layout and content of the module and pack and the remove the contents. These large cells are under considerably more pressure
proportion of critical elements (high economic importance, but at risk of short than are the pouch or cylindrical cells, and can therefore be hazardous to open if
supply) and strategic materials (either high economic importance or risk of the contents have degassed. The high manganese content of the Nissan pouch
short supply) used. The Nissan pouch cells from Automotive Energy Supply cells makes pyrometallurgical recycling less cost-effective, because manganese
Corporation (AESC) exhibit a mixed cathode chemistry with substantial is cheap, but these cells are the least problematic to open and physically separate
manganese content and relatively low levels of cobalt. The Tesla cylindrical for direct recycling.
18650 cells from Panasonic and the BMW prismatic cells from Samsung SDI both
technologies to provide whole-life-cycle tracking of battery materials, this must take place inside a thermal event protection system, while
including information and transparency on provenance, ethical sup- monitoring the battery using a thermal imaging system.
ply chains, battery health and previous use40. China has signalled its Unfortunately, 1.2 million phones per year is a drop in the ocean
intention to track battery materials. and the Apple disassembly line has been created using conventional
Automated disassembly of electrical goods has also been imple- industrial automation methods, making it inflexible and incapable of
mented to some extent in other sectors. For example, Apple has imple- keeping up adaptively with new models and varieties of phones. But
mented an automated disassembly line for the iPhone 641 that can handle building a flexible and adaptable robot disassembly line need not be pro-
1.2 million phones per year. This line has 22 stations linked on a conveyor hibitively expensive. The challenge is to create control algorithms and
system and can take the iPhone apart in 11 seconds. However, this system software that can make cheap hardware (robot arms cost only several
can only deal with an iPhone 6 model. Intact phones, of this exact model, thousands to several tens of thousands of dollars and costs have been
must be positioned at the start of the disassembly line, which then uses steadily decreasing, can work all the time, and have very long service
pre-programmed motions of 29 robots in 21 different cells to dismantle lifetimes) behave flexibly and intelligently to handle hugely complex
the phone into 8 discrete parts. The LIB is removed by heating the glue disassembly problems. If those artificial intelligence challenges can
which holds the battery in place. Owing to the potential fire hazard, be solved, then the capital investment required to respond to new and
78 | Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019
LIB cathode chemistries Ideal Poor
Cathode types LCO LFP LMO NCA NMC
Chemical formula LiCoO 2 LiFePO 4 LiMn 2 O 4 Li(Ni,Co,Al)O 2 LiNi 0.33 Mn 0.33 Co 0.33 O 2 (NMC111)
LiNi Mn Co O (NMC532)
0.5 0.3 0.2 2
LiNi 0.6 Mn 0.2 Co 0.2 O 2 (NMC622)
LiNi 0.8 Mn 0.1 Co 0.1 O 2 (NMC811)
Structure Layered Olivine Spinel Layered Layered
Year introduced 1991 1996 1996 1999 2008
Safety
Energy density
Power density
Calendar lifespan
Cycle lifespan
Performance
Cost
Market share Obsolete Electric bikes, buses Small Steady Growing (from NMC 111 > NMC 532 > NMC 622 >
and large vehicles NMC 811 to no-cobalt chemistries)
Fig. 3 | LIB cathode chemistries. The term LIB covers a range of different result in different performance attributes and there are trade-offs and
battery chemistries, each with different performance attributes. The basic compromises with each technology. The cathode chemistries of LIBs have a
concept of a LIB is that lithium can intercalate into and out of an open structure, large impact on the performance of LIBs, and these chemistries have evolved
which consists of either ‘layers’ or ‘tunnels’. Generally the anode is graphite but and improved. Fig. 3 presents a summary of the different LiB cathode
the cathode material may have different chemistries and structures, which chemistries.
changing models could be kept remarkably low (mainly software developed that can identify diverse waste materials and objects44, reli-
updates would be needed). Making robots behave intelligently will ably track objects in complex, cluttered scenes45, and dynamically guide
rely heavily on sensors to enable advanced robotic perception, espe- the actions of robot arms46. Dismantling requires forceful interaction
cially computer vision using three-dimensional RGB-D imaging devices, between robots and objects, engendering complex dynamics and con-
combined with bespoke sensors from materials and battery experts. The trol problems, such as simultaneous force and motion control47, which
robots will also require tactile and force-sensing capabilities to handle is needed for robotic cutting or unscrewing. Dismantled materials must
the complex dynamics problems of forceful interactions between the be grasped and manipulated, including fragmented or deformable
robots and the materials being disassembled. materials, which pose challenges both to vision systems and autono-
Owing to the complexity of automotive battery packs, the possibil- mous grasp planners. Adjigble et al.48 have recently demonstrated
ity of collaborative human–robot co-working using a new generation state-of-the-art performance in autonomous, vision-guided robotic
of force-sensitive ‘co-bot’ robot arms33,42 has been suggested. Unlike grasping of arbitrary objects from random, cluttered heaps. These
conventional industrial robots, these co-bots can safely share a work- advances in computer vision, artificial intelligence and robotics funda-
space with humans, and Wegener33 suggests that the robot could be mentals offer exceptionally promising tools with which to approach the
taught tasks such as unscrewing bolts, while the human handles cog- extremely difficult open research challenge of automated disassembly
nitively more complex tasks. However, this approach does not protect of electric-vehicle batteries.
the human worker from battery hazards and even the task of locating
a bolt, moving a tool to engage with it, unscrewing and removing it Stabilization and passivation of end-of-life batteries
represents a cutting-edge research challenge in robotics and machine Once LIBs have been designated for recycling, the three main processes
vision. Using current industrial robotics methods, the problem only involved consist of stabilization, opening and separation, which may
becomes attemptable (but still difficult) provided that the position be carried out separately or together. Stabilization of the LIB can be
of the bolt head is always exactly fixed, in a known pose relative to the achieved through brine or Ohmic discharge. In-process stabilization
robot, with very high precision. during opening, however, is the current route preferred in industry, as
State-of-the-art robotics, computer vision and artificial-intelligence it minimizes costs. This consists of shredding or crushing the batteries
capabilities for handling diverse waste materials do exist, and these in an inert gas such as nitrogen, carbon dioxide, or a mixture of carbon
systems have demonstrated sufficient robustness and reliability to gain dioxide and argon. State-of-the art physical processing of LIBs in Europe
acceptance by the UK nuclear industry, for example, in the deployment and North America includes the Recupyl8 (France), Akkuser49 (Finland),
of artificial-intelligence-controlled, machine-vision-guided robotic Duesenfeld50 (Germany) and Retriev51 (USA/ Canada) processes. Large-
manipulation for cutting of contaminated waste material in radioac- scale European processes do not currently use stabilization techniques
tive environments43. These technologies are now being adapted to the prior to breaking cells open, instead opting for opening under an inert
demanding problem of robotic battery disassembly. At different scales atmosphere of carbon dioxide or argon (with less than 4% molecular
of disassembly—pack removal, pack disassembly, module removal and oxygen). Opening under carbon dioxide allows for the formation of a
cell separation—different challenges and barriers to automation exist. passivating layer of lithium carbonate on any exposed lithium metal.
Some of these are set out in Fig. 4. Computer-vision algorithms are being The Retriev process differs from the European processes in that it uses
Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019 | 79
Review
Disassembly problems
• Variety of vehicle shapes and sizes
• Different pack configurations and locations
• Different fixings and tooling required
• Bolts and fixings may be rusted
• Heads of fixings may be rounded or sheared
• Position of bolt heads not always fixed
• Vehicle bodywork may be distorted
• Vehicle may be crash damaged
Pack removal • Weight of battery
Recovered components • Removal of wiring looms tricky
• Bus bars • Manipulation of connectors (especially where locking tabs fitted)
• Electronics • High voltages until wiring loom/module links removed
• Wiring looms • Lack of data on module condition in many electric-vehicle batteries
• Modules > Cells • Lack of labelling and identifying marks
• Other components • Potential fire hazards
Pack • Potential offgassing of HF
Recovered components • Sealants may be used in module manufacture (difficult to remove)
• Casings • Cells stuck together in modules with adhesives (difficult to separate)
• Terminals • Components may be soldered together (difficult to separate)
• Cells • Module state of charge may not be known
Module
Recovered materials • Clean separation of anodes and cathode for direct recycling difficult
(depending on cell chemistry • Very finely powdered materials present risks (nanoparticles)
and recycling process) • Potential for HF compounds formed from electrolyte
• Cobalt • Manganese • Potential for thermal effects if cells shorted during disassembly
• Chemistries not always known or may be proprietary
• Nickel • Aluminium
• Additional challenges with cylindrical cells (unwinding spiral)
• Lithium • Plastics
• Graphite Cell
Fig. 4 | Diagram showing challenges of disassembly at different levels of also many different types of fixtures and fastenings, including screws, bolts,
scale. Electric-vehicle battery packs are complex in design, containing wiring adhesives, sealants and solders, which are not designed for robotic removal.
looms, bus bars, electronics, modules, cells and other components. There are
a water spray during the opening step51. The water hydrolyses any the cost-effectiveness of the process54. The downside, however, is that
exposed lithium and acts as a heatsink, preventing thermal runaway contamination of the cell contents threatens to complicate the down-
during opening. stream chemical processes or compromise the value of processed
Discharging through salt solutions or ‘brine’ (seawater has been used materials streams.
previously52,53) is an alternative method that is supposed to render the An alternative to the use of salt solutions is direct Ohmic discharge
cells safe via the corrosion and subsequent water leaching into the cells of the battery through a load-bearing circuit. If the electricity can be
that passivates the internal cell chemistries. Aqueous solutions of halide reclaimed from the discharge, this could offset some of the cost of fur-
salts have been shown to result in substantial corrosion at the battery ther processing. To put it into context, the domestic consumption of
terminal ends, whereas alkali metal salts, such as sodium phosphate, a standard UK home is up to 4,600 kWh per year. So a 60-kWh battery
produce much less corrosion with no water penetration, offering the pack at a 50% state of charge and a 75% state of health has a potential
possibility that cells could be assessed and re-used53. This represents a 22.5 kWh for end-of-life reclamation, which would power a UK home for
considerably safer discharging method than using seawater; however, nearly 2 hours. At 14.3 p per kWh, this equates to UK£3.22 per pack, which
competing electrochemical reactions do occur. Oxygen, hydrogen and may seem a modest gain that does not warrant the cost of investing in
other gases, such as chlorine (depending upon the salts in the brine), equipment. However, if it is unrecovered, the energy from discharge
will form at the anode and cathode terminals, and can potentially be col- must be dissipated, and this will add to the cooling burden of the facil-
lected, though the dangers and difficulties associated with this should ity, creating additional costs. Furthermore, an economy of scale is to be
not be underestimated. The time for complete discharge is dependent anticipated when recycling electric vehicle batteries in bulk. Similarly,
on the solubility of the salt and hence the conductivity of the solution; reclaimed energy might make a useful contribution to the profitability
increasing the temperature will also shorten the discharge time. Once of repurposing for second use (see section ‘Battery assessment and
discharge is complete, the cell components can be separated into dif- disassembly’).
ferent materials streams for further processing: steel can or laminated LIB cells can be shredded at various states of charge, and from a com-
aluminium, separator, anode (graphite, copper, conductive additive), mercial point of view, if discharged modules or cells are to be processed
binder and cathode (active material, aluminium, carbon black, binder). in this way, discharge prior to shredding adds cost to the processes.
The brine discharge method is not suitable for high-voltage modules Furthermore, exactly what the optimum level of discharge might be
and packs, owing to the high rate of electrolysis and vigorous evolution remains unclear. Depending on cell chemistry and depth of discharge,
of gases that would occur. However, for low-voltage modules and cells over-discharging of cells can result in copper dissolution into the elec-
(or once a high-voltage pack has been dismantled into its constituent trolyte. The presence of this copper is detrimental for materials recla-
components) where the electrolysis can be more carefully controlled, mation as it may then contaminate all the different materials streams,
this could, in principle, offer a method of discharge in which the hydro- including the cathode and separator. If the voltage is then increased
gen and oxygen could be recovered for other applications, adding to again or ‘normal’ operation resumed55, this can be dangerous because
80 | Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019
copper can reprecipitate throughout the cell, increasing the risks of casing materials, and metal foils in the coarse fractions58. The coarse
short-circuiting and thermal runaway. fractions can be put through magnetic separation processes to remove
Current LIB-processing technologies essentially bypass these magnetic material such as steel casings and density separation pro-
concerns by feeding end-of-life batteries directly into a shredder or cesses to separate plastics from foils. The fine product is referred to as
high-temperature reactor. Industrial comminution technologies can the ‘black mass’, and comprises the electrode coatings (metal oxides
passivate batteries directly but recovered battery materials then require and carbon). The carbon can be separated from metal oxides by froth
a complex set of physical and chemical processes to produce usable flotation, which exploits the hydrophobicity of carbon to separate it
materials streams. Pyrometallurgical recycling processes (see section from the more hydrophilic metal oxides59. An overview of how these pro-
‘Stabilization and passivation of end-of-life batteries’) at scale may be cesses are used by several companies is shown in Fig. 5, which mentions
able to accept entire electric-vehicle modules without further disas- the Recupyl8 (France), Akkuser49 (Finland), Duesenfeld50 (Germany)
sembly. However, this solution fails to capture much of the embodied and Retriev51 (USA/ Canada) processes.
energy that goes into LIB manufacture, and leaves chemical separation Often, the polymeric binders from the ‘black mass’ components need
techniques with much to do as the battery materials become ever more to be eliminated to liberate the graphite and metal oxides from the cop-
intimately mixed. per and aluminium current collectors. Published routes include the
use of sonication in a solvent such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)
or dimethylformamide (DMF) to detach the cathode from the current
Recycling methods collector60, thermal heat treatment to decompose the binder61,62, or dis-
Pyrometallurgical recovery solution of the aluminium current collector63. These processes, however,
Pyrometallurgical metals reclamation uses a high-temperature furnace often require high temperatures (60–100 °C) and are relatively slow
to reduce the component metal oxides to an alloy of Co, Cu, Fe and Ni. (3 h). While ultrasound can induce faster delamination (1.5 h), this is
The high temperatures involved mean that the batteries are ‘smelted’, still too slow for a continuous-flow process and the required solvent-
and the process, which is a natural progression from those used for other to-solid mass ratios of 10:1 will not be viable on a commercial scale with
types of batteries, is already established commercially for consumer these solvents64.
LIBs. It is particularly advantageous for the recycling of general con- Recent teardowns of cells indicate that manufacturers are transition-
sumer LIBs, which currently tends to be geared towards an imperfectly ing away from fluorinated binders. Many newer batteries are moving
sorted feedstock of cells (indeed, the batteries can be processed along toward alternative binders on the anode, such as carboxymethyl cel-
with other types of waste to improve the thermodynamics and products lulose (CMC), which is water-soluble, and styrene butadiene rubber
obtained), and this versatility is also valuable with respect to electric- (SBR), which is not water-soluble but is applied as an emulsion that may
vehicle LIBs. As the metal current collectors aid the smelting process56, be easier to remove at end-of-life. There is also work on water-based
the technique has the important advantage that it can be used with binder systems for cathodes, but this is proving to be more challenging.
whole cells or modules, without the need for a prior passivation step. Other studies have used cellulose- and lignin-based binders, although
The products of the pyrometallurgical process are a metallic alloy many of these are still in the laboratory testing phase65.
fraction, slag and gases. The gaseous products produced at lower tem-
peratures (<150 °C) comprise volatile organics from the electrolyte and Hydrometallurgical metals reclamation
binder components. At higher temperatures the polymers decompose Hydrometallurgical treatments involve the use of aqueous solutions to
and burn off. The metal alloy can be separated through hydrometallur- leach the desired metals from cathode material. By far the most common
gical processes (see section ‘Hydrometallurgical metals reclamation’) combination of reagents reported is HSO/HO (ref. 66). A number of
2 4 2 2
into the component metals, and the slag typically contains the metals studies have been carried out in order to determine the most efficient
aluminium, manganese and lithium, which can be reclaimed by further set of conditions to achieve an optimal leaching rate. These include:
hydrometallurgical processing, but can alternatively be used in other concentration of leaching acid, time, temperature of solution, the solid-
industries such as the cement industry. There is relatively little safety to-liquid ratio and the addition of a reducing agent67. In most of these
risk in this process, as the cells and modules are all taken to extreme studies, it was found that leaching efficiency improved when HO was
2 2
temperatures with a reductant for metal reclamation—aluminium from added. Somewhat counterintuitively, it is understood that HO acts
2 2
the electrode foils and packaging is a major contributor here—so the as a reducing agent to convert insoluble Co(III) materials into soluble
hazards are contained within the processing. In addition, the burning of Co(II) through the reaction7:
the electrolytes and plastics is exothermic and reduce the energy con-
2LiCoO (s)+3H SO +H O →2CoSO(aq)+Li SO +4H O+O
sumption required for the process. It follows that in the pyrometallurgi- 2 2 4 2 2 4 2 4 2 2
cal process there is typically no consideration given to the reclamation
of the electrolytes and the plastics (approximately 40–50 per cent of the A range of other possible leaching acids and reducing agents have
battery weight) or other components such as the lithium salts. Despite been investigated68–72. The leached solution may also subsequently
environmental drawbacks (such as the production of toxic gases, which be treated with an organic solvent to perform a solvent extraction73–75.
must be captured or remediated and the requirement for hydrometal- Once leached, the metals may be recovered through a number of pre-
lurgical post-processing), high energy costs, and the limited number cipitation reactions controlled by manipulating the pH of the solution.
of materials reclaimed, this remains a frequently used process for the Cobalt is usually extracted either as the sulfate, oxalate, hydroxide or
extraction of high-value transition metals such as cobalt and nickel57. carbonate75–79, and then lithium can be extracted through a precipitation
reaction forming LiCO or LiPO80,81. An alternative recycling method
2 3 3 4
Physical materials separation describes mechanochemical treatment of materials, where electrode
For reclamation after comminution, recovered materials can be sub- materials are ground with a chlorine compound or complexing agent
jected to a range of physical separation processes that exploit variations to produce water-soluble salts of cobalt, which can be separated from
in properties such as particle size, density, ferromagnetism and hydro- insoluble fractions by washing with water82,83.
phobicity. These processes include sieves, filters, magnets, shaker tables Most current recycling processes fall under the umbrella of ‘reagent
and heavy media, used to separate a mixture of lithium-rich solution, low- recovery’ because the materials, with sufficient purity, can be re-used
density plastics and papers, magnetic casings, coated electrodes and not just for resynthesizing the original cathode materials, but also in a
electrode powders. The result is generally a concentration of electrode range of other applications, such as the synthesis of CoFeO or MnCoO
2 4 2 4
coatings in the fine fractions of material, and a concentration of plastics, (refs. 84–86). Following initial work focused on the leaching and
Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019 | 81
Review
Akkuser (Finland) Duesenfeld (Germany) Batteries
Recupyl (France) Retriev (USA)
Umicore (Belgium)
Water spray or
Gas blanket High-airflow
Opening immersion
comminution comminution
comminution
P se h p y a s r ic a a ti l o n p S la ir t s o e t n e ic , l, s, sep S ar iz a e ti on Vacuum drying com Se m c i o n n u d ti on Plastics
foils
Dry thermal Foils,
anode, Density Magnetic
processing cathode separation separation
Electrolyte
Sep S a i r z a e t ion Foils Hyd fi ro ltr ly a s ti i o s n and Plastics a F n o o il d s e , c a a F n t o h o i o d ls d e , , e
Dry thermal
Froth flotation
processing
Li Anode and Steel
solution cathode and
coatings iron
Cathode Foils
Slag
Third-party
Anode Cathode Li recovery Al, Li, processor
Mn
Material recovery Hydrometallurgical Ni, Co Pyrometallurgy
extraction Cu, Fe
Alloy
Fig. 5 | Flow chart representing potential routes for the circular economy of commercialized processes for recycling LIBs. Different approaches for the
LIBs, detailing second-use applications, re-use, physical recovery, chemical physical separation of batteries and the recovery of materials are indicated.
recovery and biorecovery. A range of commercial entities have
remanufacture of LiCoO (ref. 87), work has since moved on to strate- for end-of-life recycling promises to have a real impact, but the historic
2
gies for new cell chemistries, which typically contain multiple transition backlog of batteries containing polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as a
metals (for example, LiNi MnCoO; NMC). In such cases, once the binder will still need to be processed. It is clear that the current design
1 − x − y x y 2
metals have been leached from the cathode material, either sequential of cells makes recycling extremely complex and neither hydro- nor
precipitation is employed to recover the individual metals, or the direct pyrometallurgy currently provides routes that lead to pure streams of
remanufacture of the cathode is targeted, such as work to recover NMC88. material that can easily be fed into a closed-loop system for batteries.
In this work, after leaching the metals from the cathode, the concentra-
tions of the various metals in solution were measured and adjusted to Direct recycling
match those in the target material (1:1:1 Ni:Mn:Co for NMC-111). The same The removal of cathode or anode material from the electrode for
group has applied the technique to NMC with varying metal contents and reconditioning and re-use in a remanufactured LIB is known as direct
successfully resynthesized such NMC materials through the production recycling. In principle, mixed metal-oxide cathode materials can be
of a precursor hydroxide, NiMnCo(OH) with x, y and z varying accord- reincorporated into a new cathode electrode with minimal changes to
x y z 2
ing to the desired final composition of the cathode89. the crystal morphology of the active material. In general, this will require
Other groups have published similar recovery methods with modifica- the lithium content to be replenished to compensate for losses due to
tions such as additional solvent extraction steps90, lactic acid or urea as degradation of the material during battery use and because materials
an alternative to sulfuric acid (additionally facilitating resynthesis)91,92 as may not be recovered from batteries in the fully discharged state with
well as investigating the effect of magnesium in the resynthesized mate- the cathodes fully lithiated. So far, work in this area has focused primarily
rial93. The big issues to be addressed with all solvo-metallurgical pro- on laptop and mobile phone batteries, as a result of the larger amounts
cesses are the volumes of solvents required, the speed of delamination, of these available for recycling38. An example of how this recycling route
the costs of neutralization and the likelihood of cross-contamination of could work has been outlined recently94. Cathode strips, obtained after
materials. Although shredding is a fast and efficient method of rendering dismantling spent batteries, were soaked in NMP before undergoing
the battery materials safe, mixing the anode and cathode materials at sonication. Powders were either regenerated through simple solid-state
the start of the recycling process complicates downstream processing. synthesis with the addition of fresh LiCO or treated hydrothermally
2 3
A method in which anode and cathode assemblies could be separated with a solution containing LiOH/LiSO before annealing.
2 4
prior to mechanical or solvent-based separation would greatly improve For high-cobalt cathodes such as lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) conven-
material segregation. This is one of several key areas where designing tional pyrometallurgical (see section ‘Pyrometallurgical recovery’) or
82 | Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019
Comparison of different LiB recycling methods Best Worst
Quality of Quantity of
Technology recovered recovered Waste
readiness Complexity material material generation Energy usage Capital cost Production cost
Pyrometallurgy
Hydrometallurgy
Direct recycling
Presorting of Cathode Material
batteries morphology suitable for Cobalt Nickel Copper Manganese Aluminium Lithium
required preserved direct re-use recovered recovered recovered recovered recovered recovered
Pyrometallurgy No No No
Hydrometallurgy No No
Direct recycling
Fig. 6 | Comparison of different LiB recycling methods.
hydrometallurgical (see section ‘Hydrometallurgical recovery’) recy- challenges, such as the production of hazardous byproducts such as
cling processes can recover around 70% of the cathode value11. However, HF from pyrolysis of the PVDF binder or the use of the highly toxic
for other cathode chemistries that are not as cobalt-rich, this figure NMP as a solvent for dissolution. The potential for the undesirable
drops notably11. A 2019 648-lb Nissan Leaf battery, for example, costs reaction of the PVDF binder with the electrode material appears to
US$6,500–8,500 new, but the value of the pure metals in the cathode be a notable omission in the recycling literature, despite a growing
material is less than US$400 and the cost of the equivalent amount of body of research illustrating that PVDF is an excellent low-temperature
NMC (an alternative cathode material) is in the region of US$4,000. It fluorinating reagent for metal oxides98. Furthermore, recent research
is important, therefore, to appreciate that cathode material must be suggests that a certain degree of reaction can occur with the cathode
directly recycled (or upcycled) to recover sufficient value. As direct even under conditions of normal cell operation99.
recycling avoids lengthy and expensive purification steps, it could be
particularly advantageous for lower-value cathodes such as LiMnO Biological metals reclamation
2 4
and LiFePO, where manufacturing of the cathode oxides is the major Bioleaching, in which bacteria are harnessed to recover valuable met-
4
contributor to cathode costs, embedded energy and carbon dioxide als, has been used successfully in the mining industry100,101. This is an
footprint95. emerging technology for LIB recycling and metal reclamation and is
Direct recycling also has the advantage that, in principle, all battery potentially complementary to the hydrometallurgical and pyromet-
components20 can be recovered and re-used after further processing allurgical processes currently used for metal extraction102,103; cobalt
(with the exclusion of separators). Although there is substantial litera- and nickel, in particular, are difficult to separate and require additional
ture regarding the recycling of the cathode component from spent LIBs, solvent-extraction steps. The process uses microorganisms to digest
research on recycling of the graphitic anode is limited, owing to its lower metal oxides from the cathode selectively104 and to reduce these oxides
recovery value. Nevertheless, the successful re-use of mechanically to produce metal nanoparticles105,106. The number of studies that have
separated graphite anodes from spent batteries has been demonstrated, been performed thus far, however, is relatively small and there is plenty
with similar properties to that of pristine graphite96. of opportunity for further investigation in this field. The recycling meth-
Despite the potential advantages of direct recycling, however, consid- ods discussed are compared in Fig. 6.
erable obstacles remain to be overcome before it can become a practical
reality. The efficiency of direct recycling processes is correlated with the
Summary and opportunities
state of health of the battery and may not be advantageous where the
state of charge is low97. There are also potential issues with the flexibility The electric-vehicle revolution is set to change the automotive industry
of these routes to handle metal oxides of different compositions. For radically, and some of the most profound changes will inevitably relate
maximum efficiency, direct recycling processes must be tailored to spe- to the management and decommissioning of vehicles at end-of-life. Of
cific cathode formulations, necessitating different processes for differ- chief concern are the complex, high-tech power trains and, in particular,
ent cathode materials97. The ten or so years spent in a vehicle—followed, the LIBs. To put this into perspective, electrification of only 2% of the
perhaps, by a few more in a second-use application—therefore present current global car fleet would represent a line of cars—and in due course,
a challenge in an industry where battery formulations are evolving at a of end-of-life waste—that could stretch around the Earth. There is wide
rapid pace. Direct recycling may struggle to accommodate feedstocks acceptance that, for environmental and safety reasons, stockpiling (or
of unknown or poorly characterized provenance, and there will be com- worse, landfill) and wholesale transport of end-of-life electric-vehicle
mercial reluctance to re-use material if product quality is affected. batteries are not attractive options, and that the management of end-
The direct recycling route for cathode coatings is also highly sensitive of-life electric-vehicle waste will require regional solutions.
to contamination by other metals, such as aluminium, which results in In the waste management hierarchy, re-use is considered preferable
poor electrochemical performance60. In particular, methods of recover- to recycling, in order to extract maximum economic value and minimize
ing materials for further physical or chemical separation that involve a environmental impacts. Many companies in various parts of the world
high degree of comminution form fine particles of Al and Cu, which are are already piloting the second use of electric-vehicle LIBs for a range
difficult to separate from the electrode coatings. For this reason, pro- of energy storage applications. Advanced sensors and improved meth-
cesses that do not mechanically stress the electrode foils are favoured ods of monitoring batteries in the field and end-of-life testing would
in direct recycling, and separation of the materials streams prior to enable the characteristics of individual end-of-life batteries to be bet-
mechanical sorting is preferable. However, methods of removing the ter matched to proposed second-use applications, with concomitant
electrode binder—typically pyrolysis or dissolution—present further advantages in lifetime, safety and market value. Even if all the benefits of
Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019 | 83
Review
second-use are realized, however, it must be remembered that recycling at different answers to the problems posed. Research is under way
(if not landfill) is the inevitable fate of all batteries. in the Faraday Institution ReLiB Project, UK; the ReCell Project, US; at
Some recent life-cycle analyses has indicated that the application of CSIRO in Australia and at a number of European Union projects includ-
current recycling processes to the present generation of electric-vehicle ing ReLieVe, Lithorec and AmplifII.
LIBs may not in all cases result in reductions in greenhouse gas emis- Recycling electric-vehicle batteries at end-of-life is essential for many
sions compared to primary production107. More efficient processes are reasons. At present there is little hope that profitable processes will be
urgently needed to improve both the environmental and economic found for all types of current and future types of electric-vehicle LIBs
viability of recycling, which at present is heavily dependent on cobalt without substantial successful research and development, so the impera-
content. However, as the amount of cobalt in cathodes is reduced for tive to recycle will derive primarily from the desire to avoid landfill and
economic and other reasons, to recycle using current methods will become to secure the supply of strategic elements. The environmental and eco-
less advantageous owing to the lower value of the materials recovered. nomic advantages of second-use and the low volume of electric-vehicle
At present, there are low volumes of electric-vehicle batteries that batteries currently available for recycling could stifle the development
require recycling. As these volumes increase dramatically, there are of a recycling industry in some places. In many nations, the elements
questions concerning the economies (and diseconomies) of scale in and materials contained in the batteries are not available, and access to
relation to recycling operations58. Pyrometallurgical routes, in par- resources is crucial in ensuring a stable supply chain. Electric vehicles
ticular, suffer from high capital costs, and if full recyclability of LIBs is may prove to be a valuable secondary resource for critical materials.
to be achieved, alternative methods are urgently required, rather than Careful husbandry of the resources consumed by electric-vehicle battery
seeking to recycle only the most economically valuable components. manufacturing—and recycling—surely hold the key to the sustainability
There are a number of lessons that the future LIB recycling industry of the future automotive industry.
could learn from the highly successful lead–acid battery recycling indus-
try. As a technology, lead–acid batteries are relatively standardized and
Online content
simple to disassemble and recycle, which minimizes costs, allowing the
value of lead to drive recycling. Unfortunately, for a rapidly developing Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summa-
technology such as electric-vehicle LIBs, such advantages are not likely ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
to apply any time soon. edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions
A number of improvements could make electric-vehicle LIB recycling and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability
processes economically more efficient23, such as better sorting tech- are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1682-5.
nologies, a method for separating electrode materials, greater process
flexibility, design for recycling, and greater manufacturer standardiza-
1. International Energy Agency (IEA) Global EV Outlook 2018 (IEA, 2018).
tion of batteries. There is a clear opportunity for a more sophisticated 2. Ahmadi, L., Young, S. B., Fowler, M., Fraser, R. A. & Achachlouei, M. A. A cascaded life
approach to battery recovery through automated disassembly, smart cycle: reuse of electric vehicle lithium-ion battery packs in energy storage systems. Int. J.
Life Cycle Assess. 22, 111–124 (2017).
segregation of different batteries and the intelligent characterization, 3. Doughty, D. H. & Roth, E. P. A general discussion of Li ion battery safety. Electrochem. Soc.
evaluation and ‘triage’ of used batteries into streams for remanufacture, Interface 21, 37–44 (2012).
re-use and recycling. The potential benefits of this are many and include 4. Kong, L., Li, C., Jiang, J. & Pecht, M. Li-ion battery fire hazards and safety strategies.
Energies 11, 2191 (2018).
reduced costs, higher value of recovered material streams, and the near 5. Rethink Waste https://www.rethinkwaste.org/uploads/media_items/111617-shoreway-
elimination of the risk of harm to human workers. operations.original.pdf (Shoreway Operations and Contract Management, 2017).
The design of current battery packs is not optimized for easy disassem- 6. Reaugh, L. American Manganese: Virtual Reality International Conference (VRIC)
Conversation with President and CEO Larry Reaugh – MoonShot Exec, https://
bly. Use of adhesives, bonding methods and fixtures do not lend them- moonshotexec.com/american-manganese-vric-conversation-with-president-and-ceo-
selves to easy deconstruction either by hand or machine. All reported larry-reaugh/ (2018).
7. Meshram, P., Pandey, B. D. & Mankhand, T. R. Extraction of lithium from primary and
current commercial physical cell-breaking processes employ shredding
secondary sources by pre-treatment, leaching and separation: a comprehensive review.
or milling with subsequent sorting of the component materials. This Hydrometallurgy 150, 192–208 (2014).
makes the separation of the components more difficult than if they 8. Tedjar, F. in Challenge for Recycling Advanced EV Batteries https://congresses.icmab.es/
iba2013/images/files/Friday/Morning/Farouk%20Tedjar.pdf (2013).
were presorted and considerably reduces the economic value of waste
9. Katwala, A. The spiralling environmental cost of our lithium battery addiction. Wired
material streams. Many of the challenges this presents to remanufac- https://www.wired.co.uk/article/lithium-batteries-environment-impact (2018).
ture, re-use and recycling could be addressed if considered early in the 10. Larcher, D. & Tarascon, J.-M. Towards greener and more sustainable batteries for
electrical energy storage. Nat. Chem. 7, 19–29 (2015).
design process.
11. Gaines, L. Lithium-ion battery recycling processes: research towards a sustainable
For direct recycling where purity of the recovered materials is course. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 17, e00068 (2018).
required, a process which involves less component contamination dur- The net impact of LIB production can be greatly reduced if more materials can be
recovered from end-of-life LIBs, in as usable a form as possible.
ing the breaking stage is important. This would benefit from an analysis
12. Turcheniuk, K., Bondarev, D., Singhal, V. & Yushin, G. Ten years left to redesign lithium-ion
of the cell component chemistries, and the state of charge and state of batteries. Nature 559, 467–470 (2018).
health of the cells before disassembly into the component parts, rather 13. Tahil, W. The Trouble with Lithium: Implications of Future PHEV Production for Lithium
Demand (Meridian International Research, 2007).
than the production of a mixture of all components. At present, this sepa-
14. Gaines, L. & Nelson, P. Lithium-ion batteries: examining material demand and recycling
ration has only been performed at a laboratory scale and usually employs issues. In TMS 2010 Annual Meeting and Exhibition 27–39 (TMS 2013).
manual disassembly methods that are difficult to scale up economically. Initial concerns regarding resource constraints for scaling up LIB production focused
on lithium; however, in the near term, reserves of lithium are unlikely to present a
The move to greater automation and robotic disassembly promises to
constraint.
overcome some of these hurdles. Issues regarding the binder still need 15. Narins, T. P. The battery business: lithium availability and the growth of the global electric
to be resolved, and acid, alkali, solvent and thermal treatments all have car industry. Extr. Ind. Soc. 4, 321–328 (2017).
16. Schmuch, R., Wagner, R., Hörpel, G., Placke, T. & Winter, M. Performance and cost of
their positives and negatives. A cell design for reclamation of materials
materials for lithium-based rechargeable automotive batteries. Nat. Energy 3, 267
is extremely appealing, with low-cost water-soluble binders. (2018).
We have focused here on the scientific challenges of recycling LIBs, 17. Nkulu, C. B. L. et al. Sustainability of artisanal mining of cobalt in DR Congo. Nat. Sustain.
1, 495 (2018).
but we recognize that the ‘system performance’ of the LIB recycling
18. Gür, T. M. Review of electrical energy storage technologies, materials and systems:
industry will be strongly affected by a range of non-technical factors, challenges and prospects for large-scale grid storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 11, 2696–2767
such as the nature of the collection, transportation, storage and logis- (2018).
19. Sun, S. I., Chipperfield, A. J., Kiaee, M. & Wills, R. G. A. Effects of market dynamics on the
tics of LIBs at the end-of-life. As these vary from country to country
time-evolving price of second-life electric vehicle batteries. J. Energy Storage 19, 41–51
and region to region, it follows that different jurisdictions may arrive (2018).
84 | Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019
20. Gaines, L. The future of automotive lithium-ion battery recycling: charting a sustainable 56. Georgi-Maschler, T., Friedrich, B., Weyhe, R., Heegn, H. & Rutz, M. Development of a
course. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 1–2, 2–7 (2014). recycling process for Li-ion batteries. J. Power Sources 207, 173–182 (2012).
21. Jaffe, S. Vulnerable links in the lithium-ion battery supply chain. Joule 1, 225–228 (2017). 57. Lv, W. et al. A critical review and analysis on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries.
22. Helbig, C., Bradshaw, A. M., Wietschel, L., Thorenz, A. & Tuma, A. Supply risks associated ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6, 1504–1521 (2018).
with lithium-ion battery materials. J. Clean. Prod. 172, 274–286 (2018). 58. Wang, X., Gaustad, G. & Babbitt, C. W. Targeting high value metals in lithium-ion
Focusing on six battery systems (LCO-C, LMO-C, NMC-C, NCA-C, LFP-C and LFP-LTO) battery recycling via shredding and size-based separation. Waste Manag. 51, 204–213
this research evaluates the relative supply risk for individual elements (Li, Al, Ti, Mn, Fe, (2016).
Co, Ni, Cu, P and graphite) in LIBs. 59. Zhan, R., Oldenburg, Z. & Pan, L. Recovery of active cathode materials from lithium-ion
23. Diekmann, J. et al. Ecological recycling of lithium-ion batteries from electric vehicles with batteries using froth flotation. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 17, e00062 (2018).
focus on mechanical processes. J. Electrochem. Soc. 164, A6184–A6191 (2017). 60. Li, X., Zhang, J., Song, D., Song, J. & Zhang, L. Direct regeneration of recycled cathode
24. Nedjalkov, A. et al. Toxic gas emissions from damaged lithium ion batteries—analysis and material mixture from scrapped LiFePO 4 batteries. J. Power Sources 345, 78–84 (2017).
safety enhancement solution. Batteries 2, 5 (2016). 61. Li, J., Wang, G. & Xu, Z. Environmentally-friendly oxygen-free roasting/wet magnetic
25. Elwert, T., Römer, F., Schneider, K., Hua, Q. & Buchert, M. in Behaviour of Lithium-Ion separation technology for in situ recycling cobalt, lithium carbonate and graphite
Batteries in Electric Vehicles (eds Pistoia, G. & Liaw, B.) 289–321 (Springer, 2018). from spent LiCoO2/graphite lithium batteries. J. Hazard. Mater. 302, 97–104 (2016).
This article describes the recycling and value chain of LIBs from vehicles and the 62. Song, D. et al. Recovery and heat treatment of the Li(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)O2 cathode scrap
different industrial approaches currently used for cell recycling, discussing the material for lithium ion battery. J. Power Sources 232, 348–352 (2013).
economic and ecological aspects briefly and highlighting current challenges of LIB 63. Chen, J. et al. Environmentally friendly recycling and effective repairing of cathode
recycling. powders from spent LiFePO4 batteries. Green Chem. 18, 2500–2506 (2016).
26. Lambert, S. M. et al. Rapid nondestructive-testing technique for in-line quality control of 64. Zhang, Z. et al. Ultrasound-assisted hydrothermal renovation of LiCoO2 from the cathode
Li-ion batteries. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 64, 4017–4026 (2017). of spent lithium-ion batteries. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 9, 3691–3700 (2014).
27. Attidekou, P. S., Wang, C., Armstrong, M., Lambert, S. M. & Christensen, P. A. A New Time 65. Nirmale, T. C., Kale, B. B. & Varma, A. J. A review on cellulose and lignin based binders and
Constant Approach to Online Capacity Monitoring and Lifetime Prediction of Lithium Ion electrodes: small steps towards a sustainable lithium ion battery. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
Batteries for Electric Vehicles (EV). J. Electrochem. Soc. 164, A1792–A1801 (2017). 103, 1032–1043 (2017).
28. Attidekou, P. S. et al. A study of 40 Ah lithium ion batteries at zero percent state of charge 66. Ferreira, D. A., Prados, L. M. Z., Majuste, D. & Mansur, M. B. Hydrometallurgical separation
as a function of temperature. J. Power Sources 269, 694–703 (2014). of aluminium, cobalt, copper and lithium from spent Li-ion batteries. J. Power Sources
29. Cerdas, F. et al. in Recycling of Lithium-Ion Batteries 83–97 (Springer, 2018). 187, 238–246 (2009).
30. Institute of the Motor Industry (IMI) IMI Raises Skills And Regulation Concerns As Demand 67. He, L.-P., Sun, S.-Y., Song, X.-F. & Yu, J.-G. Leaching process for recovering valuable metals
For Electric And Hybrid Vehicle Surges https://www.theimi.org.uk/news/imi-raises-skills- from the LiNi 1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 cathode of lithium-ion batteries. Waste Manag. 64, 171–181
and-regulation-concerns-demand-electric-and-hybrid-vehicle-surges (IMI, 2015) (2017).
31. EVs and industrial strategy. In Electric Vehicles: Driving The Transition https://publications. 68. Li, J., Shi, P., Wang, Z., Chen, Y. & Chang, C.-C. A combined recovery process of metals in
parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/cmbeis/383/38309.htm. (Business, Energy and spent lithium-ion batteries. Chemosphere 77, 1132–1136 (2009).
Industrial Strategy Committee, House of Commons, UK, 2018). 69. Nayaka, G. P., Pai, K. V., Santhosh, G. & Manjanna, J. Dissolution of cathode active material
32. Duflou, J. R. et al. Efficiency and feasibility of product disassembly: a case-based study. of spent Li-ion batteries using tartaric acid and ascorbic acid mixture to recover Co.
CIRP Ann. 57, 583–600 (2008). Hydrometallurgy 161, 54–57 (2016).
33. Wegener, K., Chen, W. H., Dietrich, F., Dröder, K. & Kara, S. Robot assisted disassembly for 70. Pinna, E. G, Ruiz, M. C., Ojeda, W. M. & Rodriguez, M. H. Cathodes of spent Li-ion batteries:
the recycling of electric vehicle batteries. Proc. CIRP 29, 716–721 (2015). dissolution with phosphoric acid and recovery of lithium and cobalt from leach liquors.
34. Dornfeld, D. A. & Linke, B. S. (eds) Leveraging Technology for a Sustainable World. (Proc. Hydrometallurgy 167, 66–71 (2016).
19th CIRP Conf. on Life Cycle Engineering) (Springer, 2012). 71. Yang, L. et al. Preparation and magnetic performance of Co 0.8Fe2.2O4 by a sol–gel
35. Markowski, J., Ay, P., Pempel, H. & Müller, M. in Recycling und Rohstoffe https://www.vivis. method using cathode materials of spent Li-ion batteries. Ceram. Int. 42, 1897–1902
de/wp-content/uploads/RuR5/2012_RuR_443_456_Markowski.pdf (TK, 2012). (2016).
36. ReLiB. Gateway Testing & Dismantling. https://relib.org.uk/gateway-testing-dismantling/ 72. Zheng, X. et al. Spent lithium-ion battery recycling—reductive ammonia leaching of
(The Faraday Insititution, 2019). metals from cathode scrap by sodium sulphite. Waste Manag. 60, 680–688 (2017).
37. Arora, S. & Kapoor, A. in Behaviour of Lithium-Ion Batteries in Electric Vehicles (eds Pistoia, 73. Granata, G., Moscardini, E., Pagnanelli, F., Trabucco, F. & Toro, L. Product recovery from
G. & Liaw, B.) 175–200 (Springer, 2018). Li-ion battery wastes coming from an industrial pre-treatment plant: lab scale tests and
38. Chen, H. & Shen, J. A degradation-based sorting method for lithium-ion battery reuse. process simulations. J. Power Sources 206, 393–401 (2012).
PLoS One 12, e0185922 (2017). 74. Mantuano, D. P., Dorella, G., Elias, R. C. A. & Mansur, M. B. Analysis of a hydrometallurgical
39. Advances in Battery Technologies for Electric Vehicles (eds Bruno Scrosati, B., Jürgen route to recover base metals from spent rechargeable batteries by liquid–liquid
Garche, J. & Werner Tillmetz, W.) 245–263 (Elsevier, 2015). extraction with Cyanex 272. J. Power Sources 159, 1510–1518 (2006).
40. Bazilian, M. D. The mineral foundation of the energy transition. Extr. Ind. Soc. 5, 93–97 (2018). 75. Kang, J., Senanayake, G., Sohn, J. & Shin, S. M. Recovery of cobalt sulfate from spent
41. Rujanavech, C. et al. Liam—An Innovation Story (Apple, 2016). lithium ion batteries by reductive leaching and solvent extraction with Cyanex 272.
42. Luca, A., Albu-Schaffer, A., Haddadin, S. & Hirzinger, G. in 2006 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Hydrometallurgy 100, 168–171 (2010).
Intelligent Robots and Systems 1623–1630 (IEEE, 2006). 76. Kang, J., Sohn, J.-S., Chang, H., Senanayake, G. & Shin, S. Preparation of cobalt oxide from
43. Chapman, H., Lawton, S. & Fitzpatrick, J. Laser cutting for nuclear decommissioning: an concentrated cathode material of spent lithium ion batteries by hydrometallurgical
integrated safety approach. Atw. Int. Z. Kernenergie 63, 521–526 (2018). method. Adv. Powder Technol. 21, 175–179 (2010).
44. Sun, L. et al. A novel weakly-supervised approach for RGB-D-based nuclear waste object 77. Pagnanelli, F., Moscardini, E., Altimari, P., Abo Atia, T. & Toro, L. Cobalt products from
detection. IEEE Sens. J. 19, 3487–3500 (2018). real waste fractions of end of life lithium ion batteries. Waste Manag. 51, 214–221
45. Xiao, J., Stolkin, R., Gao, Y. & Leonardis, A. Robust fusion of color and depth data for (2016).
RGB-D target tracking using adaptive range-invariant depth models and spatio-temporal 78. Hu, C., Guo, J., Wen, J. & Peng, Y. Preparation and electrochemical performance of nano-
consistency constraints. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 48, 2485–2499 (2018). Co 3O4 anode materials from spent Li-ion batteries for lithium-ion batteries. J. Mater. Sci.
46. Marturi, N. et al. Dynamic grasp and trajectory planning for moving objects. Auton. Technol. 29, 215–220 (2013).
Robots 43, 1241–1256 (2018). 79. Paulino, J. F., Busnardo, N. G. & Afonso, J. C. Recovery of valuable elements from spent
47. Ortenzi, V., Stolkin, R., Kuo, J. & Mistry, M. Hybrid motion/force control: a review. Adv. Li-batteries. J. Hazard. Mater. 150, 843–849 (2008).
Robot. 31, 1102–1113 (2017). 80. Gao, W. et al. Lithium carbonate recovery from cathode scrap of spent lithium-ion
48. Adjigble, M. et al. Model-free and learning-free grasping by Local Contact Moment battery: a closed-loop process. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 1662–1669 (2017).
matching. In Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) 2933–2940 (IEEE, 2018). 81. Yang, Y. et al. A closed-loop process for selective metal recovery from spent lithium iron
This paper presents an algorithm that is key to automated battery processing, in which phosphate batteries through mechanochemical activation. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5,
an artificial intelligence and robotic vision system can autonomously plan where to 9972–9980 (2017).
place a robot’s fingers to stably grasp an arbitrarily shaped object, without relying on 82. Wang, M.-M., Zhang, C.-C. & Zhang, F.-S. An environmental benign process for cobalt and
any prior knowledge or models of the object or needing any machine learning using lithium recovery from spent lithium-ion batteries by mechanochemical approach. Waste
offline training data. Manag. 51, 239–244 (2016).
49. Pudas, J., Erkkila, A. & Viljamaa, J. Battery recycling method. US Patent No. 8, 979, 006 83. Wang, M.-M., Zhang, C.-C. & Zhang, F.-S. Recycling of spent lithium-ion battery with
(2010). polyvinyl chloride by mechanochemical process. Waste Manag. 67, 232–239 (2017).
50. Hanisch, C. Recycling method for treating used batteries, in particular rechargeable 84. Natarajan, S., Anantharaj, S., Tayade, R. J., Bajaj, H. C. & Kundu, S. Recovered spinel
batteries, and battery processing installation. US Patent Application 2019/0260101A1 MnCo 2O4 from spent lithium-ion batteries for enhanced electrocatalytic oxygen evolution
(2019). in alkaline medium. Dalton Trans. 46, 14382–14392 (2017).
51. Smith, W. N. & Swoffer, S. Recovery of lithium ion batteries. US Patent 8, 616, 475 (2013). 85. Xi, G., Zhao, T., Wang, L., Dun, C. & Zhang, Y. Effect of doping rare earths on
52. Li, J., Wang, G. & Xu, Z. Generation and detection of metal ions and volatile organic magnetostriction characteristics of CoFe2O4 prepared from spent Li-ion batteries. Physica
compounds (VOCs) emissions from the pretreatment processes for recycling spent B 534, 76–82 (2018).
lithium-ion batteries. Waste Manag. 52, 221–227 (2016). 86. Moura, M. N. et al. Synthesis, characterization and photocatalytic properties of
53. Shaw-Stewart, J. et al. Aqueous solution discharge of cylindrical lithium-ion cells. Sustain. nanostructured CoFe2O4 recycled from spent Li-ion batteries. Chemosphere 182,
Mater. Technol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susmat.2019.e00110 (2019). 339–347 (2017).
54. Al-Thyabat, S., Nakamura, T., Shibata, E. & Iizuka, A. Adaptation of minerals processing 87. Li, J., Zhao, R., He, X. & Liu, H. Preparation of LiCoO2 cathode materials from spent
operations for lithium-ion (LiBs) and nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries recycling: lithium–ion batteries. Ionics 15, 111–113 (2009).
critical review. Miner. Eng. 45, 4–17 (2013). 88. Zou, H., Gratz, E., Apelian, D. & Wang, Y. A novel method to recycle mixed cathode
55. Guo, R., Lu, L., Ouyang, M. & Feng, X. Mechanism of the entire overdischarge process and materials for lithium ion batteries. Green Chem. 15, 1183–1191 (2013).
overdischarge-induced internal short circuit in lithium-ion batteries. Sci. Rep. 6, 30248 The process is elegantly designed to remove impurities and easily tunable to
(2016). synthesize the current generation of cathode materials.
Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019 | 85
Review
89. Sa, Q. et al. Synthesis of diverse LiNixMnyCozO2 cathode materials from lithium ion battery 104. Mishra, D., Kim, D.-J., Ralph, D. E., Ahn, J.-G. & Rhee, Y.-H. Bioleaching of metals from spent
recovery stream. J. Sustain. Metall. 2, 248–256 (2016). lithium ion secondary batteries using Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. Waste Manag. 28,
90. Yang, Y., Xu, S. & He, Y. Lithium recycling and cathode material regeneration from acid 333–338 (2008).
leach liquor of spent lithium-ion battery via facile co-extraction and co-precipitation 105. Pollmann, K., Raff, J., Merroun, M., Fahmy, K. & Selenska-Pobell, S. Metal binding by
processes. Waste Manag. 64, 219–227 (2017). bacteria from uranium mining waste piles and its technological applications. Biotechnol.
91. Li, L. et al. Sustainable recovery of cathode materials from spent lithium-ion batteries Adv. 24, 58–68 (2006).
using lactic acid leaching system. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5, 5224–5233 (2017). 106. Macaskie, L. E. et al. Today’s wastes, tomorrow’s materials for environmental protection.
92. Liu, Y. & Liu, M. Reproduction of Li battery LiNi xMnyCo1−x−yO2 positive electrode material Hydrometallurgy 104, 483–487 (2010).
from the recycling of waste battery. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 42, 18189–18195 (2017). 107. Ciez, R. E. & Whitacre, J. F. Examining different recycling processes for lithium-ion
93. Nithya, C., Thirunakaran, R., Sivashanmugam, A. & Gopukumar, S. High-performing batteries. Nat. Sustain. 2, 148–156 (2019).
LiMgxCuyCo1–x–yO2 cathode material for lithium rechargeable batteries. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 4, 4040–4046 (2012).
Acknowledgements Many of the ideas suggested for recovery of high-value materials will be
94. Shi, Y., Chen, G., Liu, F., Yue, X. & Chen, Z. Resolving the compositional and structural
trialled by the Faraday Institution’s ReLiB fast-start project funded by the Faraday Institution
defects of degraded LiNixCoyMnzO2 particles to directly regenerate high-performance
(grant numbers FIRG005 and FIRG006) and by the ReCell Center, at Argonne National
lithium-ion battery cathodes. ACS Energy Lett. 3, 1683–1692 (2018).
Laboratory, funded by the US Department of Energy. We acknowledge the contribution to the
This paper highlights the importance of direct recycling to gain economic value from
creation of the ReLiB project of N. Rowson (Birmingham Centre for Strategic Elements and
the resource.
Critical Materials). We also thank Q. Dai at Argonne National Laboratories for providing
95. Dunn, J. B., Gaines, L., Sullivan, J. & Wang, M. Q. Impact of recycling on cradle-to-gate
additional data for Fig. 6.
energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions of automotive lithium-ion batteries.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 12704–12710 (2012).
This paper was one of the first to report the environmental burdens of material Author contributions G.H. and P.A. produced the original concept of the Review, and wrote
production, assembly and recycling of automotive LIBs in hybrid electric, plug-in the article, integrating contributions from the team and editing and shaping the review. G.H.
hybrid electric, and battery electric vehicles. produced the ‘Social and environmental impacts of LIBs’ section. R. Somerville and E.K.
96. Sabisch, J. E. C., Anapolsky, A., Liu, G. & Minor, A. M. Evaluation of using pre-lithiated collaborated on the ‘Physical materials separation’ and ‘Stabilization and passivation of end-of-
graphite from recycled Li-ion batteries for new LiB anodes. Resour. Conserv. Recycling life batteries’ sections; E.K. produced the ‘Biological recovery’ section. L.D. and P.S. produced
129, 129–134 (2018). the ‘Direct recycling’ section and part of the ‘Hydrometallurgical metals reclamation’ section.
Whereas most papers focus on the recycling of valuable cathode materials, this R. Stolkin and A.W. collaboratively produced the ‘Automating battery assembly’ section. P.C.
examines the direct recycling of anode material. provided contributions on safety, and safe discharging of batteries, O.H. contributed to the
97. Editorial. Recycle spent batteries. Nat. Energy 4, 253 (2019). supply and value chain, environmental impact and economic assessments and S.L. provided
98. Clemens, O. & Slater, P. R. Topochemical modifications of mixed metal oxide compounds information on battery re-use. A.A. and K.R. produced most of the ‘Hydrometallurgical metals
by low-temperature fluorination routes. Rev. Inorg. Chem. 33, https://doi.org/10.1515/ reclamation’ section. L.G. critically revised the article. Figures 1 and 2 were created by G.H.
revic-2013-0002 (2013). (with help from R. Somerville and E.K.) and Fig. 4 was created by R. Somerville. Figure 3 was
99. Bolli, C., Guéguen, A., Mendez, M. A. & Berg, E. J. Operando monitoring of F formation in created by L.D., P.A. and G.H. and Fig. 6 was created by G.H. and L.G.
lithium ion batteries. Chem. Mater. 31, 1258–1267 (2019).
This paper suggests that the binder (PVDF) may also contribute to cell degradation and Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
must be taken into account when developing future recycling methodologies.
100. Karimi, G. R., Rowson, N. A. & Hewitt, C. J. Bioleaching of copper via iron oxidation Additional information
from chalcopyrite at elevated temperatures. Food Bioprod. Process. 88, 21–25 (2010). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G.H. or P.A.
101. Smith, S. L., Grail, B. M. & Johnson, D. B. Reductive bioprocessing of cobalt-bearing Peer review information Nature thanks Anand Bhatt and Matthew Lacey and the other,
limonitic laterites. Miner. Eng. 106, 86–90 (2017). anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
102. Horeh, N. B., Mousavi, S. M. & Shojaosadati, S. A. Bioleaching of valuable metals from Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
spent lithium-ion mobile phone batteries using Aspergillus niger. J. Power Sources 320, Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
257–266 (2016). published maps and institutional affiliations.
103. Xin, Y. et al. Bioleaching of valuable metals Li, Co, Ni and Mn from spent electric
vehicle Li-ion batteries for the purpose of recovery. J. Clean. Prod. 116, 249–258 (2016). © Springer Nature Limited 2019
86 | Nature | Vol 575 | 7 November 2019
