Prompting In the context of LLMs, prompting refers to the method of providing an LLM with a speci c input or cue to generate a desired output or perform a task. For example, if we want the LLM to translate a sentence from English to Chinese, we can prompt it like this Translate the text from English to Chinese. Text: The early bird catches the worm. Translation: Prompting is crucial for LLMs because it directly in uences how effectively these models under stand and respond to user queries. A well-crafted prompt can guide an LLM to generate more accurate, relevant, and contextually appropriate responses.

Furthermore, this process can be iter atively re ned. By analyzing the responses of the LLM, users can adjust their prompts to align more closely with their speci c needs. Given the importance of prompting in applying LLMs, prompt design has become an essential skill for users and developers working with LLMs. This leads to an active research area, called prompt engineering, in which we design effective prompts to make better use of LLMs and enhance their practical utility in real-world applications. Animportant concept related to prompting is in-context learning.

When prompting an LLM, we can add new information to the context, such as demonstrations of problem-solving. This allows the LLM to learn from this context how to solve the problem. Here is an example of prompting LLMs with a few demonstrations of how to classify text based on sentiment polarity. Here are some examples of text classi cation. Example 1: We had a delightful dinner together.

→ Label: Positive Example 2: I’m frustrated with the delays. → Label: Negative What is the label for “That comment was quite hurtful.”? Label: In-context learning is often seen as an emergent ability of LLMs that arises after pre-training. Though LLMs can be trained or tuned to perform new tasks, in-context learning provides a very ef cient way to adapt these models without any training or tuning effort. Perhaps this is one of the most notable features of LLMs: they indeed learn general knowledge about the world and language during pre-training, which we can easily apply to new challenges.

Moreover, in-context learning re ects the broader trend of making AI systems more generalizable and user-friendly. Instead of requiring specialized engineers to ne-tune models for every unique task, users can interact with LLMs in a more intuitive way, simply providing examples or adjusting the context as needed. In this chapter, we focus on prompting techniques in LLMs. We begin by considering several interesting prompt designs commonly used in prompt engineering. Then, we discuss a series of 3.1 General Prompt Design 97 re nements to these methods.

Finally, we explore approaches for automating prompt design. 3.1 General Prompt Design This section presents basic concepts in prompt design, along with examples of how to prompt LLMs for various NLP tasks. Since the effectiveness of prompting is highly dependent on the LLMs being used, prompts often vary across different LLMs, making it dif cult to provide a comprehensive list of prompts for all LLMs and downstream tasks. Therefore, this discussion is not focused on any speci c LLM. Instead, the goal is to provide guiding principles for prompt design.

3.1.1 Basics The term prompt is used in many different ways. In this chapter we de ne a prompt as the input text to an LLM,denotedbyx. TheLLMgeneratesatextybymaximizingtheprobabilityPr(y|x). In this generation process, the prompt acts as the condition on which we make predictions, and it can contain any information that helps describe and solve the problem. Aprompt can be obtained using a prompt template (or template for short) [Liu et al., 2023a].

A template is a piece of text containing placeholders or variables, where each placeholder can be lled with speci c information. Here are two templates for asking the LLM for weekend suggestions. Please give me some suggestions for a fun weekend. If {∗premise∗}, what are your suggestions for a fun weekend. In the rst template, we simply instruct the LLM to return some suggestions.

So the template is just a piece of text with no variables. In the second template, the variable {∗premise∗} needs to be speci ed by the users to provide a premise for making suggestions. For example, if we input premise = the weather is nice this weekend then we can generate a prompt If the weather is nice this weekend, what are your suggestions for a fun weekend. We can also design a template with multiple variables. Here is an example in which we compare the two sentences in terms of their semantic similarity.

98 Prompting Here is a sentence {∗sentence1∗} Here is another sentence {∗sentence2∗} Compute the semantic similarity between the two sentences A popular way to format prompts is to write each input or output in a “name:content” style. For example, we can describe a conversation between two people, named John and David, and use the LLM to continue the conversation. A template of such prompts is given by John: {∗utterance1∗} David: {∗utterance2∗} John: {∗utterance3∗} David: {∗utterance4∗} John: {∗utterance5∗} David: {∗utterance6∗} John: {∗utterance7∗} David: The “name:content” format can be used to de ne the task that we want the LLM to perform. For example, given that “Q” and “A” are commonly used abbreviations for “Question” and “An swer”, respectively, we can use the following template to do question-answering. Q: {∗question∗} A: This format can be used to describe more complex tasks.

For example, the following is an example of providing a speci cation for a translation task Task: Translation Source language: English Target language: Chinese Style: Formal text Template: Translate the following sentence: {∗sentence∗} In practical systems, it is common to represent and store such data in key-value pairs, such as the JSON format1. When the problem is dif cult to describe in an attribute-based manner, it is more common to instruct LLMs with a clear and detailed description. There are many ways to do this. One 1The JSON representation is 3.1 General Prompt Design 99 example is to assign a role to LLMs and provide suf cient context. The following is a template that instructs an LLM to act as an expert and answer questions from children.

You are a computer scientist with extensive knowledge in the eld of deep learn ing. Please explain the following computer-related concept to a child around 10 years old, using simple examples whenever possible. {∗concept∗} Here the text “You are a computer scientist ... deep learning. ” is sometimes called system information, and is provided to help the LLM understand the context or constraints of the task it is being asked to perform.

3.1.2 In-context Learning Learning can occur during inference. In-context learning is one such method, where prompts involve demonstrations of problem-solving, and LLMs can learn from these demonstrations how to solve new problems. Since we do not update model parameters in this process, in-context learning can be viewed as a way to ef ciently activate and reorganize the knowledge learned in pre-training without additional training or ne-tuning. This enables quick adaptation of LLMs to newproblems, pushing the boundaries of what pre-trained LLMs can achieve without task-speci c adjustments. In-context learning can be illustrated by comparing three methods: zero-shot learning, one shot learning and few-shot learning.

Zero-shot learning, as its name implies, does not involve a traditional “learning” process. It instead directly applies LLMs to address new problems that were not observed during training. In practice, we can repetitively adjust prompts to guide the LLMs in generating better responses, without demonstrating problem-solving steps or providing examples. Consider the following example. Suppose we want to use an LLM as an assistant that can help correct English sentences.

A zero-shot learning prompt is given by { } "Task": "Translation" "Source language": "English" "Target language": "Chinese" "Style": "Formal text" "Template": "Translate the following sentence: {∗sentence∗}" 100 Prompting SYSTEM Youare a helpful assistant, and are great at grammar correction. USER Youwill be provided with a sentence in English. The task is to output the correct sentence. Input: She don’t like going to the park. Output: Here the gray words are used to indicate different elds of the prompt.

In one-shot learning, we extend this prompt by adding a demonstration of how to correct sentences, thereby allowing the LLM to learn from this newly-added experience. SYSTEM Youare a helpful assistant, and are great at grammar correction. DEMO Youwillbeprovided with a sentence in English. The task is to output the correct sentence. Input: There is many reasons to celebrate.

Output: There are many reasons to celebrate. USER Youwill be provided with a sentence in English. The task is to output the correct sentence. Input: She don’t like going to the park. Output: Furthermore, we can add more demonstrations to enable few-shot learning.

SYSTEM Youare a helpful assistant, and are great at grammar correction. DEMO1 Youwill be provided with a sentence in English. The task is to output the correct sentence. Input: There is many reasons to celebrate. Output: There are many reasons to celebrate.

DEMO2 Youwill be provided with a sentence in English. The task is to output the correct sentence. Input: Me and my friend goes to the gym every day. Output: My friend and I go to the gym every day. USER Youwill be provided with a sentence in English.

The task is to output the correct sentence. Input: She don’t like going to the park. Output: In few-shot learning, we essentially provide a pattern that maps some inputs to the corre sponding outputs. The LLM attempts to follow this pattern in making predictions, provided that the prompt includes a suf cient number of demonstrations, although generally small. It is also 3.1 General Prompt Design 101 possible to use simpler patterns to achieve this.

For example, one can use the following few-shot learning prompt for translating words from Chinese to English. DEMO 现在 → now 来 → come 去 → go 男孩 → boy USER 女孩 → If the LLM is powerful enough, few-shot learning can enable it to address complex prob lems, such as mathematical reasoning. For example, consider the following task of summing two numbers and then dividing the sum by their product. DEMO 12 5 → (12+5)/(12×5)=0.283 3 1 → (3+1)/(3×1)=1.33 −9 4 → (−9+4)/(−9×4)=0.138 15 15 → (15+15)/(15×15)=0.133 USER 19 73 → In many practical applications, the effectiveness of in-context learning relies heavily on the quality of prompts and the fundamental abilities of pre-trained LLMs. On one hand, we need a signi cant prompt engineering effort to develop appropriate prompts that help LLMs learn more effectively from demonstrations.

On the other hand, stronger LLMs can make better use of in context learning for performing new tasks. For example, suppose we wish to use an LLM to translate words from Inuktitut to English. If the LLM lacks pre-training on Inuktitut data, its understanding of Inuktitut will be weak, and it will be dif cult for the model to perform well in translation regardless of how we prompt it. In this case, we need to continue training the LLM with more Inuktitut data, rather than trying to nd better prompts. It might be interesting to explore how in-context learning emerges during pre-training and why it works during inference.

One simple understanding is that LLMs have gained some knowledge of problem-solving, but there are many possible predictions, which are hard to distinguish when the models confront new problems. Providing demonstrations can guide the LLMs to follow the “correct” paths. Furthermore, some researchers have tried to interpret in-context learning from several different perspectives, including Bayesian inference [Xie et al., 2022], gradient descent [Dai et al., 2023; Von Oswald et al., 2023], linear regression [Akyürek et al., 2023], meta learning [Garg et al., 2022], and so on. 3.1.3 Prompt Engineering Strategies Designing prompts is highly empirical. In general, there are many ways to prompt an LLM for performing the same task, and we need to perform a number of trial-and-error runs to nd a satisfactory prompt.

To write good prompts more ef ciently, one can follow certain strategies. Examples of common prompting principles include 102 Prompting • Describing the task as clearly as possible. When we apply an LLM to solve a problem, we need to provide a precise, speci c, and clear description of the problem and instruct the LLM to perform as we expect. This is particularly important when we want the output of the LLM to meet certain expectations. For example, suppose we are curious about climate change.

A simple prompt for asking the LLM to provide some information is Tell me about climate change. Since this instruction is too general, the LLM may generate a response that addresses any aspect of climate change, which may not align with our speci c interests. In this case, we can instead use prompts that are speci c and detailed. One such example is Provide a detailed explanation of the causes and effects of climate change, including the impact on global temperatures, weather patterns, and sea levels. Also, discuss possible solutions and actions being taken to mitigate these effects.

Nowsuppose we intend to explain climate change to a 10-year-old child. We can adjust the above prompt further. Explain the causes and effects of climate change to a 10-year-old child. Talk about how it affects the weather, sea levels, and temperatures. Also, mention some things people are doing to help.

Try to explain in simple terms and do not exceed 500 words. • Guiding LLMs to think. LLMs have exhibited surprisingly good capabilities to “think”. A common example is that well-developed LLMs have achieved impressive performance in mathematical reasoning tasks, which are considered challenging. In prompt engineering, the “thinking” ability of LLMs needs to be activated through appropriate prompting, espe cially for problems that require signi cant reasoning efforts.

In many cases, an LLM that is instructed to “think” can produce completely different results compared with the same LLM that is instructed to perform the task straightforwardly. For example, Kojima et al. [2022] found that simply appending “Let’s think step by step” to the end of each prompt can improve the performance of LLMs on several reasoning tasks. LLMs can be prompted to “think” in a number of ways. One method is to instruct LLMs to generate steps for rea soning about the problem before reaching the nal answer.

For example, consider a task of solving mathematical problems. See below for a simple prompt for this task. 3.1 General Prompt Design 103 You are a mathematician. You will be provided with a math problem. Please solve the problem.

Since solving math problems requires a detailed reasoning process, LLMs would probably make mistakes if they attempted to work out the answer directly. So we can explicitly ask LLMsto follow a given reasoning process before coming to a conclusion. You are a mathematician. You will follow these detailed reasoning steps when solving math problems. Step 1: Problem Interpretation.

The mathematician carefully listens to your query and understands the in tricate details of the mathematical challenge you have presented. Step 2: Strategy Formulation. Drawing upon their extensive knowledge, the mathematician chooses the most effective strategy tailored to the type of math problem, whether it is algebra, calculus, or geometry. Step 3: Detailed Calculation. With precision and expertise, the mathematician performs the necessary calculations step by step, adhering to all mathematical principles.

Step 4: Solution Review. Before providing the nal answer, the mathematician meticulously checks the calculations for accuracy and offers a concise explanation or rationale for the solution. You will be provided with a math problem. Please solve the problem. {∗problem∗}

Prompt engineering is the practice of optimizing input text to guide the behavior of generative AI models. While machine learning provides the mathematical framework for these models, the inference phase is where the prompt interacts with the trained weights. Effective prompts often use Chain-of-Thought (CoT) techniques to improve reasoning. For LLMs to be useful, they must balance their prior machine learning training with the specific constraints provided in the user's prompt.

Prompt engineering is the process of designing effective inputs for language models to generate accurate and relevant responses.

In advanced AI applications, prompt engineering is often combined with retrieval techniques to enhance the quality of generated outputs. This method is known as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).

RAG systems work by retrieving relevant documents from a knowledge base and injecting them into the prompt. This helps the model produce more grounded and context-aware responses.

Similar to Machine Learning concepts, ensuring proper generalization is important in RAG systems. The system should retrieve relevant information without overfitting to specific queries.